41-50
Navajo Art
The Navajo, a Native American people living in the southwestern United States,
live in small scattered settlements. In many respects, such as education,
occupation, and leisure activities, their life is like that of other groups that
contribute to the diverse social fabric of North American culture in the twenty-first
century. At the same time, they have retained some traditional cultural practices
that are associated with particular art forms. For example, the most important
traditional Navajo rituals include the production of large floor paintings. These are
actually made by pouring thin, finely controlled streams of colored sands or
pulverized vegetable and mineral substances, pollen, and flowers in precisepatterns
on the ground. The largest of these paintings may be up to 5.5 meters in diameter
and cover the entire floor of a room. Working from the inside of the design
outward, the Navajo artist and his assistants will sift the black, white, bluish-gray,
orange, and red materials through their fingers to create the finely detailed
imagery. The paintings and chants used in the ceremonies are directed by well-
trained artists and singers who enlist the aid of spirits who are impersonated by
masked performers. The twenty-four known Navajo chants can be represented by
up to 500 sand paintings. These complex paintings serve as memory aids to guide
the singers during the performance of the ritual songs, which can last up to nine
days.
The purpose and meaning of the sand paintings can be explained by examining one
of the most basic ideals of Navajo society, embodied in their word hozho (beauty
or harmony, goodness, and happiness). It coexists with hochxo ("ugliness," or
"evil," and "disorder") in a world where opposing forces of dynamism and stability
create constant change. When the world, which was created in beauty, becomes
[410]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
ugly and disorderly, the Navajo gather to perform rituals with songs and make sand
paintings to restore beauty and harmony to the world. Some illness is itself
regarded as a type of disharmony. Thus, the restoration of harmony through a
ceremony can be part of a curing process.
Men make sand paintings that are accurate copies of paintings from the past. The
songs sung over the paintings are also faithful renditions of songs from the past. By
recreating these arts, which reflect the original beauty of creation, the Navajo bring
beauty to the present world. As relative newcomers to the Southwest, a place
where their climate, neighbors, and rulers could be equally inhospitable, the
Navajo created these art forms to affect the world around them, not just through the
recounting of the actions symbolized, but through the beauty and harmony of the
artworks themselves. The paintings generally illustrate ideas and events from the
life of a mythical hero, who, after being healed by the gods, gave gifts of songs and
paintings. Working from memory, the artists re-create the traditional form of the
image as accurately as possible.
The Navajo are also world-famous for the designs on their woven blankets. Navajo
women own the family flocks, control the shearing of the sheep, the carding, the
spinning, and dyeing of the thread, and the weaving of the fabrics. While the men
who make faithful copies of sand paintings from the past represent the principle of
stability in Navajo thought, women embody dynamism and create new designs for
every weaving they make. Weaving is a paradigm of the creativity of a
mythic ancestor named Spider woman who wove the universe as a cosmic web that
united earth and sky. It was she who, according to legend, taught Navajo women
how to weave. As they prepare their materials and weave, Navajo women imitate
the transformations that originally created the world.
[411]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Working on their looms, Navajo weavers create images through which they
experience harmony with nature. It is their means of creating beauty and thereby
contributing to the beauty, harmony, and healing of the world. Thus, weaving is a
way of seeing the world and being part of it.
www.ZabanExam.com
[412]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Climate Of Venus
Earth has abundant water in its oceans but very little carbon dioxide in its
relatively thin atmosphere. By contrast, Venus is very dry and its thick atmosphere
is mostly carbon dioxide. The original atmospheres of both Venus and Earth were
derived at least in part from gases spewed forth, or outgassed, by volcanoes. The
gases that emanate from present-day volcanoes on Earth, such as Mount Saint
Helens, are predominantly water vapor, carbon dioxide, and sulfur dioxide. These
gases should therefore have been important parts of the original atmospheres of
both Venus and Earth. Much of the water on both planets is also thought to have
come from impacts from comets, icy bodies formed in the outer solar system.
In fact, water probably once dominated the Venusian atmosphere. Venus and Earth
are similar in size and mass, so Venusian volcanoes may well have outgassed as
much water vapor as on Earth, and both planets would have had about the same
number of comets strike their surfaces. Studies of how stars evolve suggest that the
early Sun was only about 70 percent as luminous as it is now, so the temperature in
Venus’ early atmosphere must have been quite a bit lower. Thus water vapor
would have been able to liquefy and form oceans on Venus. But if water vapor and
carbon dioxide were once so common in the atmospheres of both Earth and Venus,
what became of Earth’s carbon dioxide? And what happened to the water on
Venus?
The answer to the first question is that carbon dioxide is still found in abundance
on Earth, but now, instead of being in the form of atmospheric carbon dioxide, it is
either dissolved in the oceans or chemically bound into carbonate rocks, such as
the limestone and marble that formed in the oceans. If Earth became as hot as
Venus, much of its carbon dioxide would be boiled out of the oceans and baked out
[413]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
of the crust. Our planet would soon develop a thick, oppressive carbon dioxide
atmosphere much like that of Venus.
To answer the question about Venus’ lack of water, we must return to the early
history of the planet. Just as on present-day Earth, the oceans of Venus limited the
amount of atmospheric carbon dioxide by dissolving it in the oceans and binding it
up in carbonate rocks. But being closer to the Sun than Earth is, enough of the
liquid water on Venus would have vaporized to create a thick cover of water vapor
clouds. Since water vapor is a greenhouse gas, this humid atmosphere—perhaps
denser than Earth’s present-day atmosphere, but far less dense than the atmosphere
that envelops Venus today—would have efficiently trapped heat from the Sun. At
first, this would have had little effect on the oceans of Venus. Although the
temperature would have climbed above 100° C, the boiling point of water at sea
level on Earth, the added atmospheric pressure from water vapor would have kept
the water in Venus' oceans in the liquid state.
This hot and humid state of affairs may have persisted for several hundred million
years. But as the Sun’s energy output slowly increased over time, the temperature
at the surface would eventually have risen above 374°C. Above this temperature,
no matter what the atmospheric pressure, Venus’ oceans would have begun to
evaporate, and the added water vapor in the atmosphere would have increased the
greenhouse effect. This would have made the temperature even higher and caused
the oceans to evaporate faster, producing more water vapor. That, in turn, would
have further intensified the greenhouse effect and made the temperature climb
higher still.
Once Venus’ oceans disappeared, so did the mechanism for removing carbon
dioxide from the atmosphere. With no oceans to dissolve it, outgassed carbon
dioxide began to accumulate in the atmosphere, intensifying the greenhouse effect
[414]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
even more. Temperatures eventually became high enough to "bake out" any carbon
dioxide that was trapped in carbonate rocks. This liberated carbon dioxide formed
the thick atmosphere of present-day Venus. Over time, the rising temperatures
would have leveled off, solar ultraviolet radiation having broken down atmospheric
water vapor molecules into hydrogen and oxygen. With all the water vapor gone,
the greenhouse effect would no longer have accelerated.
[415]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Trade And Early State Formation
Bartering was a basic trade mechanism for many thousands of years; often
sporadic and usually based on notions of reciprocity, it involved the mutual
exchange of commodities or objects between individuals or groups. Redistribution
of these goods through society lay in the hands of chiefs, religious leaders, or kin
groups. Such redistribution was a basic element in chiefdoms. The change from
redistribution to formal trade—often based on regulated commerce that perhaps
involved fixed prices and even currency—was closely tied to growing political and
social complexity and hence to the development of the state in the ancient world.
In the 1970s, a number of archaeologists gave trade a primary role in the rise of
ancient states. British archaeologist Colin Renfrew attributed the dramatic
flowering of the Minoan civilization on Crete and through the Aegean to
intensified trading contacts and to the impact of olive and vine cultivation on local
communities. As agricultural economies became more diversified and local food
supplies could be purchased both locally and over longer distances, a far-reaching
economic interdependence resulted. Eventually, this led to redistribution systems
for luxuries and basic commodities, systems that were organized and controlled by
Minoan rulers from their palaces. As time went on, the self-sufficiency of
communities was replaced by mutual dependence. Interest in long-distance trade
brought about some cultural homogeneity from trade and gift exchange, and
perhaps even led to piracy. Thus, intensified trade and interaction, and the
flowering of specialist crafts, in a complex process of positive feedback, led to
much more complex societies based on palaces, which were the economic hubs of
a new Minoan civilization.
[416]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Renfrew’s model made some assumptions that are now discounted. For example,
he argued that the introduction of domesticated vines and olives allowed a
substantial expansion of land under cultivation and helped to power the emergence
of complex society. Many archaeologists and paleobotanists now question this
view, pointing out that the available evidence for cultivated vines and olives
suggests that they were present only in the later Bronze Age. Trade, nevertheless,
was probably one of many variables that led to the emergence of palace economies
in Minoan Crete.
American archaeologist William Rathje developed a hypothesis that considered an
explosion in long-distance exchange a fundamental cause of Mayan civilization in
Mesoamerica. He suggested that the lowland Mayan environment was deficient in
many vital resources, among them obsidian, salt, stone for grinding maize, and
many luxury materials. All these could be obtained from the nearby highlands,
from the Valley of Mexico, and from other regions, if the necessary trading
networks came into being. Such connections, and the trading expeditions to
maintain them, could not be organized by individual villages. The Maya lived in
a relatively uniform environment, where every community suffered from the same
resource deficiencies. Thus, argued Rathje, long-distance trade networks were
organized through local ceremonial centers and their leaders. In time, this
organization became a state, and knowledge of its functioning was exportable, as
were pottery, tropical bird feathers, specialized stone materials, and other local
commodities.
Rathje’s hypothesis probably explains part of the complex process of Mayan state
formation, but it suffers from the objection that suitable alternative raw materials
can be found in the lowlands. It could be, too, that warfare became a competitive
[417]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
response to population growth and to the increasing scarcity of prime agricultural
land, and that it played an important role in the emergence of the Mayan states.
Now that we know much more about ancient exchange and commerce, we know
that, because no one aspect of trade was an overriding cause of cultural change or
evolution in commercial practices, trade can never be looked on as a unifying
factor or as a primary agent of ancient civilization. Many ever-changing variables
affected ancient trade, among them the demand for goods. There were also the
logistics of transportation, the extent of the trading network, and the social and
political environment. Intricate market networks channeled supplies along well-
defined routes. Authorities at both ends might regulate the profits fed back to the
source, providing the incentive for further transactions. There may or may not have
been a market organization. Extensive long-distance trade was a consequence
rather than a cause of complex societies.
[418]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 42
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[419]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Geographic Isolation Of Species
Biologist Ernst Mayr defined a species as “an actually or potentially interbreeding
population that does not interbreed with other such populations when there is
opportunity to do so.” A key event in the origin of many species is the separation
of a population with its gene pool (all of the genes in a population at any one time)
from other populations of the same species, thereby preventing population
interbreeding. With its gene pool isolated, a separate population can follow its own
evolutionary course. In the formation of many species, the initial isolation of a
population seems to have been a geographic barrier. This mode of evolving new
species is called allopatric speciation.
Many factors can isolate a population geographically. A mountain range may
emerge and gradually split a population of organisms that can inhabit only lowland
lakes, certain fish populations might become isolated in this way. Similarly, a
creeping glacier may gradually divide a population, or a land bridge such as the
Isthmus of Panama may form and separate the marine life in the ocean waters on
either side.
How formidable must a geographic barrier be to keep populations apart? It
depends on the ability of the organisms to move across barriers. Birds and coyotes
can easily cross mountains and rivers. The passage of wind-blown tree pollen is
also not hindered by such barriers, and the seeds of many plants may be carried
back and forth on animals. In contrast, small rodents may find a deep canyon or a
wide river an effective barrier. For example, the Grand Canyon, in the
southwestern United States, separate the range of the white-tailed antelope squirrel
from that of the closely related Harris’ antelope squirrel. Smaller, with a shorter
tail that is white underneath, the white-tailed antelope squirrel inhabits deserts
[420]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
north of the canyon and west of the Colorado River in southern California. Harris'
antelope squirrel has a more limited range in deserts south of the Grand Canyon.
Geographic isolation creates opportunities for new species to develop, but it does
not necessarily lead to new species because speciation occurs only when the gene
pool undergoes enough changes to establish reproductive barriers between the
isolated population and its parent population. The likelihood of allopatric
speciation increases when a population is small as well as isolated, making it more
likely than a large population to have its gene pool changed substantially. For
example, in less than two million years, small populations of stray animals and
plants from the South American mainland that managed to colonize the Galapagos
Islands gave rise to all the species that now inhabit the islands.
When oceanic islands are far enough apart to permit populations to evolve in
isolation, but close enough to allow occasional dispersions to occur, they are
effectively outdoor laboratories of evolution. The Galapagos island chain is one of
the world's greatest showcases of evolution. Each island was born from underwater
volcanoes and was gradually covered by organisms derived from strays that rode
the ocean currents and winds from other islands and continents. Organisms can
also be carried to islands by other organisms, such as sea birds that travel long
distances with seeds clinging to their feathers.
The species on the Galapagos Islands today, most of which occur nowhere else,
descended from organisms that floated, flew, or were blown over the sea from the
South American mainland. For instance, the Galapagos island chain has a total of
thirteen species of closely related birds called Galapagos finches. These birds have
many similarities but differ in their feeding habits and their beak type, which is
correlated with what they eat. Accumulated evidence indicates that all thirteen
finch species evolved from a single small population of ancestral birds that
[421]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
colonized one of the islands. Completely isolated on the island after migrating
from the mainland, the founder population may have undergone significant
changes in its gene pool and become a new species. Later, a few individuals of this
new species may have been blown by storms to a neighboring island. Isolated on
this second island, the second founder population could have evolved into a second
new species, which could later recolonize the island from which its founding
population emigrated. Today each Galapagos island has multiple species of
finches, with as many as ten on some islands.
www.ZabanExam.com
[422]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Explaining Dinosaur Extinction
Dinosaurs rapidly became extinct about 65 million years ago as part of a mass
extinction known as the K-T event, because it is associated with a geological
signature known as the K-T boundary, usually a thin band of sedimentation found
in various parts of the world (K is the traditional abbreviation for the Cretaceous,
derived from the German name Kreidezeit). Many explanations have been
proposed for why dinosaurs became extinct. For example, some have blamed
dinosaur extinction on the development of flowering plants, which were
supposedly more difficult to digest and could have caused constipation or
indigestion - except that flowering plants first evolved in the Early Cretaceous,
about 60 million years before the dinosaurs died out. In fact, several scientists have
suggested that the duckbill dinosaurs and horned dinosaurs, with their complex
battery of grinding teeth, evolved to exploit this new resource of rapidly growing
flowering plants. Others have blamed extinction on competition from the
mammals, which allegedly ate all the dinosaur eggs—except that mammals and
dinosaurs appeared at the same time in the Late Triassic, about 190 million years
ago, and there is no reason to believe that mammals suddenly acquired a taste for
dinosaur eggs after 120 million years of coexistence. Some explanations (such as
the one stating that dinosaurs all died of diseases) fail because there is no way to
scientifically test them, and they cannot move beyond the realm of speculation and
guesswork.
This focus on explaining dinosaur extinction misses an important point: the
extinction at the end of the Cretaceous was a global event that killed off organisms
up and down the food chain. It wiped out many kinds of plankton in the ocean and
many marine organisms that lived on the plankton at the base of the food chain.
[423]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
These included a variety of clams and snails, and especially the ammonites, a
group of shelled squidlike creatures that dominated the Mesozoic seas and had
survived many previous mass extinctions. The K-T event marked the end of the
marine reptiles, such as the mosasaurs and the plesiosaurs, which were the largest
creatures that had ever lived in the seas and which ruled the seas long before
whales evolved. On land, there was also a crisisamong the land plants, in addition
to the disappearance of dinosaurs. So any event that can explain the destruction of
the base of the food chain (plankton in the ocean, plants on land) can better explain
what happened to organisms at the top of the food chain, such as the dinosaurs. By
contrast, any explanation that focuses strictly on the dinosaurs completely misses
the point. The Cretaceous extinctions were a global phenomenon, and dinosaurs
were just a part of a bigger picture.
According to one theory, the Age of Dinosaurs ended suddenly 65 million years
ago when a giant rock from space plummeted to Earth. Estimated to be ten to
fifteen kilometers in diameter, this bolide (either a comet or an asteroid) was
traveling at cosmic speeds of 20-70 kilometers per second, or 45,000-156,000
miles per hour. Such a huge mass traveling at such tremendous speeds carries an
enormous amount of energy. When the bolide struck this energy was released and
generated a huge shock wave that leveled everything for thousands of kilometers
around the impact and caused most of the landscape to burst into flames. The
bolide struck an area of the Yucatan Peninsula of Mexico known as Chicxulub,
excavating a crater 15-20 kilometers deep and at least 170 kilometers in diameter.
The impact displaced huge volumes of seawater, causing much flood damage in
the Caribbean. Meanwhile, the bolide itself excavated 100 cubic kilometers of rock
and debris from the site, which rose to an altitude of 100 kilometers. Most of it fell
back immediately, but some of it remained as dust in the atmosphere for months.
[424]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
This material, along with the smoke from the fires, shrouded Earth, creating a form
of nuclear winter. According to computerized climate models, global temperatures
fell to near the freezing point, photosynthesis halted, and most plants on land and
in the sea died. With the bottom of the food chain destroyed, dinosaurs could not
survive.
[425]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Callisto and Ganymede
From 1996 to 1999, the Galileo spacecraft passed through the Jovian system,
providing much information about Jupiter's satellites. Callisto, the outermost of
Jupiter's four largest satellites, orbits the planet in seventeen days at a distance
from Jupiter of two million kilometers. Like our own Moon, Callisto rotates in the
same period as it revolves, so it always keeps the same face toward Jupiter. Its
noontime surface temperature is only about -140°C, so water ice is stable on its
surface year-round. Callisto has a diameter of 4.820 kilometers, almost the same as
that of Mercury. Its mass is only one-third as great, which means its density must
be only one-third as great as well. This tells us that Callisto has far less of the
rocky metallic materials found in the inner planets and must instead be an icy body
through much of its interior.
Callisto has not fully differentiated, meaning separated into layers of different
density materials. Astronomers can tell that it lacks a dense core from the details of
its gravitational pull on the Galileo spacecraft during several very close flybys.
This fact surprised scientists, who expected that all the big icy moons would be
differentiated. It is much easier for an icy body to differentiate than for a rocky
one, since the melting temperature of ice is so low. Only a little heating will soften
the ice and get the process started, allowing the rock and metal to sink to the center
and the slushy ice to float to the surface. Yet Callisto seems to have frozen solid
before the process of differentiation was complete.
Like our Moon's highlands, the surface of Callisto is covered with impact craters.
The survival of these craters tells us that an icy object can form and retain impact
craters in its surface. In thinking of ice so far from the Sun, it is important not to
judge its behavior from that of the much warmer ice we know on Earth; at the
[426]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
temperatures of the outer solar system, ice on the surface is nearly as hard as rock,
and behaves similarly. Ice on Callisto does not deform or flow like ice in glaciers
on Earth. Callisto is unique among the planet-sized objects of the solar system in
its absence of interior forces to drive geological evolution. The satellite was born
dead and has remained geologically dead for more than four billion years.
Ganymede, another of Jupiter's satellites and the largest in our solar system, is also
cratered, but less so than Callisto. About one-quarter of its surface seems to be as
old and heavily cratered; the rest formed more recently, as we can tell by the sparse
covering of impact craters as well as the relative freshness of the
craters. Ganymede is a differentiated world, like the terrestrial
planets. Measurements of its gravity field tell us that the rock and metal sank to
form a core about the size of our Moon, with a mantle and crust of ice floating
above it. In addition, the Galileo spacecraft discovered that Ganymede has a
magnetic field, the signature of a partially molten interior. Ganymede is not a dead
world, but rather a place of continuing geological activity powered by an internal
heat source. Much of its surface may be as young as half a billion years.
The younger terrain is the result of tectonic and volcanic forces. Some features
formed when the crust cracked, flooding many of the craters with water from the
interior. Extensive mountain ranges were formed from compression of the crust,
forming long ridges with parallel valleys spaced one to two kilometers apart. In
some places older impact craters were split and pulled apart. There are even
indications of large-scale crustal movements that are similar to the plate tectonics
of Earth.
Why is Ganymede different from Callisto? Possibly the small difference in size
and internal heating between the two led to this divergence in their evolution. But
more likely the gravity of Jupiter is to blame for Ganymede's continuing geological
[427]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
activity. Ganymede is close enough to Jupiter that tidal forces from the giant planet
may have episodically heated its interior and triggered major convulsions on its
crust.
[428]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 43
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[429]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The Empire Of Alexander The Great
In 334 B.C. Alexander the Great took his Greek armies to the east and in only a
few years completed his creation of an empire out of much of southwest Asia. In
the new empire, barriers to trade and the movement of peoples were removed;
markets were put in touch with one another. In the next generation thousands of
Greek traders and artisans would enter this wider world to seek their fortunes.
Alexander’s actions had several important consequences for the region occupied
by the empire.
The first of these was the expansion of Greek civilization throughout the Middle
East. Greek became the great international language. Towns and cities were
established not only as garrisons (military posts) but as centers for the diffusion of
Greek language, literature, and thought, particularly through libraries, as at
Antioch (in modern Turkey) and the most famous of all, at Alexandria in Egypt,
which would be the finest in the world for the next thousand years.
Second, this internationalism spelled the end of the classical Greek city-state - the
unit of government in ancient Greece - and everything it stood for. Most city-states
had been quite small in terms of citizenry, and this was considered to be a good
thing. The focus of life was the agora, the open marketplace where assemblies
could be held and where issues of the day, as well as more fundamental topics such
as the purpose of government or the relationship between law and freedom, could
be discussed and decisions made by individuals in person. The philosopher Plato
(428-348 B.C.) felt that the ideal city-state should have about 5,000 citizens,
because to the Greeks it was important that everyone in the community should
know each other. In decision making, the whole body of citizens together would
have the necessary knowledge in order generally to reach the right decision, even
[430]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
though the individual might not be particularly qualified to decide. The
philosopher Aristotle (384-322 B.C.), who lived at a time when the city-state
system was declining, believed that a political entity of 100,000 simply would not
be able to govern itself.
This implied that the city-state was based on the idea that citizens were not
specialists but had multiple interests and talents - each a so-called jack-of-all-trades
who could engage in many areas of life and politics. It implied a respect for the
wholeness of life and a consequent dislike of specialization. It implied economic
and military self-sufficiency. But with the development of trade and commerce in
Alexander's empire came the growth of cities; it was no longer possible to be a
jack-of-all-trades.One now had to specialize, and with specialization came
professionalism. There were getting to be too many persons to know, an easily
observable community of interests was being replaced by a multiplicity of
interests. The city-state was simply too "small-time".
Third, Greek philosophy was opened up to the philosophy and religion of the East.
At the peak of the Greek city-state, religion played an important part. Its gods -
such as Zeus, father of the gods, and his wife Hera - were thought of very much as
being like human beings but with superhuman abilities. Their worship was linked
to the rituals connected with one’s progress through life - birth, marriage, and
death - and with invoking protection against danger, making prophecies, and
promoting healing, rather than to any code of behavior. Nor was there much of a
theory of afterlife.
Even before Alexander’s time, a life spent in the service of their city-state no
longer seemed ideal to Greeks. The Athenian philosopher Socrates (470-399 B.C.)
was the first person in Greece to propose a morality based on individual conscience
rather than the demands of the state, and for this he was accused of not believing in
[431]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
the city’s gods and so corrupting the youth, and he was condemned to death. Greek
philosophy - or even a focus on conscience - might complement religion but was
no substitute for it, and this made Greeks receptive to the religious systems of the
Middle East, even if they never adopted them completely. The combination of the
religious instinct of Asia with the philosophic spirit of Greece spread across the
world in the era after Alexander’s death, blending the culture of the Middle East
with the culture of Greece.
www.ZabanExam.com
[432]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The Origin Of Petroleum
Petroleum is defined as a gaseous, liquid, and semisolid naturally occurring
substance that consists chiefly of hydrocarbons (chemical compounds of carbon
and hydrogen). Petroleum is therefore a term that includes both oil and natural gas.
Petroleum is nearly always found in marine sedimentary rocks. In the ocean,
microscopic phytoplankton (tiny floating plants) and bacteria (simple, single-celled
organisms) are the principal sources of organic matter that is trapped and buried in
sediment. Most of the organic matter is buried in clay that is slowly converted to a
fine-grained sedimentary rock known as shale. During this conversion, organic
compounds are transformed to oil and natural gas.
Sampling on the continental shelves and along the base of the continental slopes
has shown that fine muds beneath the seafloor contain up to 8 percent organic
matter. Two additional kinds of evidence support the hypothesis that petroleum is a
product of the decomposition of organic matter: oil possesses optical properties
known only in hydrocarbons derived from organic matter, and oil contains nitrogen
and certain compounds believed to originate only in living matter. A complex
sequence of chemical reactions is involved in converting the original solid organic
matter to oil and gas, and additional chemical changes may occur in the oil and gas
even after they have formed.
It is now well established that petroleum migrates through aquifers and can
become trapped in reservoirs. Petroleum migration is analogous to groundwater
migration. When oil and gas are squeezed out of the shale in which they originated
and enter a body of sandstone or limestone somewhere above, they migrate readily
because sandstones (consisting of quartz grains) and limestones (consisting of
carbonate minerals) are much more permeable than any shale. The force of
[433]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
molecular attraction between oil and quartz or carbonate minerals is weaker than
that between water and quartz or carbonate minerals. Hence, because oil and water
do not mix, water remains fastened to the quartz or carbonate grains, while oil
occupies the central parts of the larger openings in the porous sandstone or
limestone. Because oil is lighter than water, it tends to glide upward past the
carbonate- and quartz-held water. In this way, oil becomes segregated from the
water; when it encounters a trap, it can form a pool.
Most of the petroleum that forms in sediments does not find a suitabletrap and
eventually makes its way, along with groundwater, to the surface of the sea. It is
estimated that no more than 0.1 percent of all the organic matter originally buried
in a sediment is eventually trapped in an oil pool. It is not surprising, therefore, that
the highest ratio of oil and gas pools to volume of sediment is found in rock no
older than 2.5 million years - young enough so that little of the petroleum has
leaked away - and that nearly 60 percent of all oil and gas discovered so far has
been found in strata that formed in the last 65 million years This does not mean
that older rocks produced less petroleum; it simply means that oil in older rocks
has had a longer time in which to leak away.
How much oil is there in the world? This is an extremely controversial question.
Many billions of barrels of oil have already been pumped out of the ground. A lot
of additional oil has been located by drilling but is still waiting to be pumped out.
Possibly a great deal more oil remains to be found by drilling. Unlike coal, the
volume of which can be accurately estimated, the volume of undiscovered oil can
only be guessed at. Guesses involve the use of accumulated experience from a
century of drilling. Knowing how much oil has been found in an intensively drilled
area, such as eastern Texas, experts make estimates of probable volumes in other
regions where rock types and structures are similar to those in eastern Texas. Using
[434]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
this approach and considering all the sedimentary basins of the world, experts
estimate that somewhere between 1,500 and 3,000 billion barrels of oil will
eventually be discovered.
[435]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
El Niño
The cold Humboldt Current of the Pacific Ocean flows toward the equator along
the coasts of Ecuador and Peru in South America. When the current approaches the
equator, the westward-flowing trade winds cause nutrient-rich cold water along the
coast to rise from deeper depths to more shallow ones. This upwelling of water has
economic repercussions. Fishing, especially for anchovies, is a major local
industry.
Every year during the months of December and January, a weak, warm
countercurrent replaces the normally cold coastal waters. Without the upwelling of
nutrients from below to feed the fish, fishing comes to a standstill. Fishers in this
region have known the phenomenon for hundreds of years. In fact, this is the time
of year they traditionally set aside to tend to their equipment and await the return
of cold water. The residents of the region have given this phenomenon the name of
El Niño, which is Spanish for "the child," because it occurs at about the time of the
celebration of birth of the Christ child.
While the warm-water countercurrent usually lasts for two months or less, there are
occasions when the disruption to the normal flow lasts for many months. In these
situations, water temperatures are raised not just along the coast, but for thousands
of kilometers offshore. Over the last few decades, the term El Niño has come to be
used to describe these exceptionally strong episodes and not the annual event.
During the past 60 years, at least ten El Niños have been observed. Not only do El
Niños affect the temperature of the equatorial Pacific, but the strongest of them
impact global weather.
The processes that interact to produce an El Niño involve conditions all across the
Pacific, not just in the waters off South America. Over 60 years ago, Sir Gilbert
[436]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Walker, a British scientist, discovered a connection between surface pressure
readings at weather stations on the eastern and western sides of the Pacific. He
noted that a rise in atmospheric pressure in the eastern Pacific is usually
accompanied by a fall in pressure in the western Pacific and vice versa. He called
this seesaw pattern the Southern Oscillation. It was later realized that there is a
close link between El Niño and the Southern Oscillation. In fact, the link between
the two is so great that they are often referred to jointly as ENSO (El Niño-
Southern Oscillation).
During a typical year, the eastern Pacific has a higher pressure than the western
Pacific does. This east-to-west pressure gradient enhances the trade winds over the
equatorial waters. This results in a warm surface current that moves east to west at
the equator. The western Pacific develops a thick, warm layer of water while the
eastern Pacific has the cold Humboldt Current enhanced by upwelling. However,
in other years the Southern Oscillation, for unknown reasons, swings in the
opposite direction, dramatically changing the usual conditions described above,
with pressure increasing in the western Pacific and decreasing in the eastern
Pacific. This change in the pressure gradient causes the trade winds to weaken or,
in some cases, to reverse. This then causes the warm water in the western Pacific to
flow eastward, increasing sea-surface temperatures in the central and eastern
Pacific. The eastward shift signals the beginning of an El Niño.
Scientists try to document as many past El Niño events as possible by piecing
together bits of historical evidence, such as sea-surface temperature records, daily
observations of atmospheric pressure and rainfall, fisheries’ records from South
America, and the writings of Spanish colonists dating back to the fifteenth century.
From such historical evidence we know that El Niños have occurred as far back as
records go. It would seem that they are becoming more frequent.Records indicate
[437]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
that during the sixteenth century, an El Niño occurred on average every six
years. Evidence gathered over the past few decades indicates that El Niños are now
occurring on average a little over every two years. Even more alarming is the fact
that they appear to be getting stronger. The 1997-1998 El Niño brought copious
and damaging rainfall to the southern United States, from California to
Florida. Snowstorms in the northeast portion of the United States were more
frequent and intense than in most years.
[438]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 44
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[439]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
From Fish to Terrestrial Vertebrates
One of the most significant evolutionary events that occurred on Earth was the
transition of water-dwelling fish to terrestrial tetrapods (four-limbed organisms
with backbones). Fish probably originated in the oceans, and our first records of
them are in marine rocks. However, by the Devonian Period (408 million to 362
million years ago), they had radiated into almost all available aquatic habitats,
including freshwater settings. One of the groups whose fossils are especially
common in rocks deposited in fresh water is the lobe-finned fish.
The freshwater Devonian lobe-finned fish rhipidistian crossopterygian is of
particular interest to biologists studying tetrapod evolution. These fish lived in
river channels and lakes on large deltas. The delta rocks in which these fossils are
found are commonly red due to oxidized iron minerals, indicating that the deltas
formed in a climate that had alternate wet and dry periods. If there were periods of
drought, any adaptations allowing the fish to survive the dry conditions would have
been advantageous. In these rhipidistians，several such adaptations existed. It is
known that they had lungs as well as gills for breathing. Cross sections cut through
some of the fossils reveal that the mud filling the interior of the carcass differed in
consistency and texture depending on its location inside the fish. These differences
suggest a saclike cavity below the front end of the gut that can only be interpreted
as a lung. Gills were undoubtedly the main source of oxygen for these fish, but the
lungs served as an auxiliary breathing device for gulping air when the water
became oxygen depleted, such as during extended periods of drought. So, these
fish had already evolved one of the prime requisites for living on land: the ability
to use air as a source of oxygen.
[440]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
A second adaptation of these fish was in the structure of the lobe fins. The fins
were thick, fleshy, and quite sturdy, with a median axis of bone down the center.
They could have been used as feeble locomotor devices on land, perhaps good
enough to allow a fish to flop its way from one pool of water that was almost dry
to an adjacent pond that had enough water and oxygen for survival. These fins
eventually changed into short, stubby legs. The bones of the fins of a Devonian
rhipidistian exactly match in number and position the limb bones of the earliest
known tetrapods, the amphibians. It should be emphasized that the evolution of
lungs and limbs was in no sense an anticipation of future life on land. These
adaptations developed because they helped fish to survive in their existing aquatic
environment.
What ecological pressures might have caused fishes to gradually abandon their
watery habitat and become increasingly land-dwelling creatures? Changes in
climate during the Devonian may have had something to do with this if freshwater
areas became progressively more restricted. Another impetus may have been new
sources of food. The edges of ponds and streams surely had scattered dead fish and
other water-dwelling. In addition, plants had emerged into terrestrial habitats in
areas near streams and ponds, and crabs and other arthropods were also members
of this earliest terrestrial community. Thus, by the Devonian the land habitat
marginal to freshwater was probably a rich source of protein that could be
exploited by an animal that could easily climb out of water. Evidence from teeth
suggests that these earliest tetrapods did not utilize land plants as food; they were
presumably carnivorous and had not developed the ability to feed on plants.
How did the first tetrapods make the transition to a terrestrial habitat? Like early
land plants such as rhyniophytes, they made only a partial transition; they were still
quite tied to water. However, many problems that faced early land plants were not
[441]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
applicable to the first tetrapods.The ancestors of these animals already had a
circulation system, and they were mobile, so that they could move to water to
drink. Furthermore, they already had lungs, which rhipidistians presumably used
for auxiliary breathing. The principal changes for the earliest tetrapods were in the
skeletal system—changes in the bones of the fins, the vertebral column, pelvic
girdle, and pectoral girdle.
[442]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The Use Of The Camera Obscura
The precursor of the modern camera, the camera obscura is a darkened enclosure
into which light is admitted through a lens in a small hole. The image of the
illuminated area outside the enclosure is thrown upside down as if by magic onto a
surface in the darkened enclosure. This technique was known as long ago as the
fifth century B.C. in China. Aristotle also experimented with it in the fourth
century B.C., and Leonardo da Vinci described it in his notebooks in 1490. In 1558
Giovanni Battista Della Porta wrote in his twenty-volume work Magia naturalis
(meaning "natural magic") instructions for adding a convex lens to improve the
quality of the image thrown against a canvas or panel in the darkened area where
its outlines could be traced. Later, portablecamera obscuras were developed, with
interior mirrors and drawing tables on which the artist could trace the image. For
the artist, this technique allows forms and linear perspective to be drawn precisely
as they would be seen from a single viewpoint. Mirrors were also used to reverse
the projected images to their original positions.
Did some of the great masters of painting, then, trace their images using a camera
obscura? Some art historians are now looking for clues of artists' use of such
devices. One of the artists whose paintings are being analyzed from this point of
view is the great Dutch master, Jan Vermeer, who lived from 1632 to 1675 during
the flowering of art and science in the Netherlands, including the science of
optics. Vermeer produced only about 30 known paintings, including his famous
The Art of Painting. The room shown in it closely resembles the room in other
Vermeer paintings, with lighting coming from a window on the left, the same roof
beams, and similar floor tiles, suggesting that the room was fitted with a camera
obscura on the side in the foreground. The map hung on the opposite wall was a
[443]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
real map in Vermeer's possession, reproduced in such faithfuldetail that some kind
of tracery is suspected. When one of Vermeer’s paintings was X-rayed, it did not
have any preliminary sketches on the canvas beneath the paint, but rather the
complete image drawn in black and white without any trial sketches. Vermeer did
not have any students, did not keep any records, and did not encourage anyone to
visit his studio, facts that can be interpreted as protecting his secret use of a camera
obscura.
In recent times the British artist David Hockney has published his investigations
into the secret use of the camera obscura, claiming that for up to 400 years, many
of Western art’s great masters probably used the device to produce almost
photographically realistic details in their paintings. He includes in this group
Caravaggio, Hans Holbein, Leonardo da Vinci, Diego Velazquez, Jean-Auguste-
Dominique Ingres, Agnolo Bronzino, and Jan van Eyck. From an artist’s point of
view, Hockney observed that a camera obscura compresses the complicated forms
of a three-dimensional scene into two-dimensional shapes that can easily be traced
and also increases the contrast between light and dark, leading to the chiaroscuro
effect seen in many of these paintings. In Jan van Eyck’s The Marriage of
Giovanni Arnolfini and Giovanna Cenami, the complicated foreshortening in the
chandelier and the intricate detail in the bride’s garments are among the clues that
Hockney thinks point to the use of the camera obscura.
So what are we to conclude? If these artists did use a camera obscura, does
that diminish their stature? Hockney argues that the camera obscura does not
replace artistic skill in drawing and painting. In experimenting with it, he found
that it is actually quite difficult to use for drawing, and he speculates that the artists
probably combined their observations from life with tracing of shapes.
[444]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Seagrasses
Many areas of the shallow sea bottom are covered with a lush growth of aquatic
flowering plants adapted to live submerged in seawater. These plants are
collectively called seagrasses. Seagrass beds are strongly influenced by several
physical factors. The most significant is water motion: currents and waves. Since
seagrass systems exist in both sheltered and relatively open areas, they are subject
to differing amounts of water motion. For any given seagrass system, however, the
water motion is relatively constant. Seagrass meadows in relatively turbulent
waters tend to form a mosaic of individual mounds, whereas meadows in relatively
calm waters tend to form flat, extensive carpets. The seagrass beds, in turn,
dampen wave action, particularly if the blades reach the water surface. This
damping effect can be significant to the point where just one meter into a seagrass
bed the wave motion can be reduced to zero. Currents are also slowed as they
move into the bed.
The slowing of wave action and currents means that seagrass beds tend to
accumulate sediment. However, this is not universal and depends on the currents
under which the bed exists. Seagrass beds under the influence of strong currents
tend to have many of the lighter particles, including seagrass debris, moved out,
whereas beds in weak current areas accumulate lighter detrital material. It is
interesting that temperate seagrass beds accumulate sediments from sources
outside the beds, whereas tropical seagrass beds derive most of their sediments
from within.
Since most seagrass systems are depositional environments, they eventually
accumulate organic material that leads to the creation of fine-grained sediments
with a much higher organic content than that of the surrounding unvegetated areas.
[445]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
This accumulation, in turn, reduces the water movement and the oxygen supply.
The high rate of metabolism (the processing of energy for survival) of the
microorganisms in the sediments causes sediments to be anaerobic (without
oxygen) below the first few millimeters. According to ecologist J. W. Kenworthy,
anaerobic processes of the microorganisms in the sediment are an important
mechanism for regenerating and recycling nutrients and carbon, ensuring the high
rates of productivity—that is, the amount of organic material produced-that are
measured in those beds. In contrast to other productivity in the ocean, which
is confined to various species of algae and bacteria dependent on nutrient
concentrations in the water column, seagrasses are rooted plants that absorb
nutrients from the sediment or substrate. They are, therefore, capable of recycling
nutrients into the ecosystem that would otherwise be trapped in the bottom and
rendered unavailable.
Other physical factors that have an effect on seagrass beds include light,
temperature, and desiccation (drying out). For example, water depth and turbidity
(density of particles in the water) together or separately control the amount of light
available to the plants and the depth to which the seagrasses may extend. Although
marine botanist W. A. Setchell suggested early on that temperature was critical to
the growth and reproduction of eelgrass, it has since been shown that this
particularly widespread seagrass grows and reproduces at temperatures between 2
and 4 degrees Celsius in the Arctic and at temperatures up to 28 degrees Celsius on
the northeastern coast of the United States. Still, extreme temperatures, in
combination with other factors, may have dramatic detrimental effects. For
example, in areas of the cold North Atlantic, ice may form in winter. Researchers
Robertson and Mann note that when the ice begins to break up, the wind and tides
may move the ice around, scouring the bottom and uprooting the eelgrass. In
[446]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
contrast, at the southern end of the eelgrass range, on the southeastern coast of the
United States, temperatures over 30 degrees Celsius in summer cause excessive
mortality. Seagrass beds also decline if they are subjected to too much exposure to
the air. The effect of desiccation is often difficult to separate from the effect of
temperature. Most seagrass beds seem tolerant of considerable changes in salinity
(salt levels) and can be found in brackish (somewhat salty) waters as well as in
full- strength seawater.
[447]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 45
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[448]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Microscopes The Beringia Landscape
During the peak of the last ice age, northeast Asia (Siberia) and Alaska were
connected by a broad land mass called the Bering Land Bridge. This land bridge
existed because so much of Earth’s water was frozen in the great ice sheets that sea
levels were over 100 meters lower than they are today. Between 25,000 and 10,000
years ago, Siberia, the Bering Land Bridge, and Alaska shared many
environmental characteristics. These included a common mammalian fauna of
large mammals, a common flora composed of broad grasslands as well as wind-
swept dunes and tundra, and a common climate with cold, dry winters and
somewhat warmer summers. The recognition that many aspects of the modern
flora and fauna were present on both sides of the Bering Sea as remnants of the
ice-age landscape led to this region being named Beringia.
It is through Beringia that small groups of large mammal hunters, slowly
expanding their hunting territories, eventually colonized North and South America.
On this archaeologists generally agree, but that is where the agreement stops. One
broad area of disagreement in explaining the peopling of the Americas is
the domain of paleoecologists, but it is critical to understanding human history:
what was Beringia like?
The Beringian landscape was very different from what it is today. Broad,
windswept valleys; glaciated mountains; sparse vegetation; and less moisture
created a rather forbidding land mass. This land mass supported herds of now-
extinct species of mammoth, bison, and horse and somewhat modern versions of
caribou, musk ox, elk, and saiga antelope. These grazers supported in turn a
number of impressive carnivores, including the giant short-faced bear, the saber-
tooth cat, and a large species of lion.
[449]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The presence of mammal species that require grassland vegetation has led Arctic
biologist Dale Guthrie to argue that while cold and dry, there must have been broad
areas of dense vegetation to support herds of mammoth, horse, and bison. Further,
nearly all of the ice-age fauna had teeth that indicate an adaptation to grasses and
sedges; they could not have been supported by a modern flora of mosses and
lichens. Guthrie has also demonstrated that the landscape must have been subject
to intense and continuous winds, especially in winter. He makes this argument
based on the anatomy of horse and bison, which do not have the ability to search
for food through deep snow cover. They need landscapes with strong winds that
remove the winter snows, exposing the dry grasses beneath. Guthrie applied the
term “ mammoth steppe" to characterize this landscape.
In contrast, Paul Colinvaux has offered a counterargument based on the analysis of
pollen in lake sediments dating to the last ice age. He found that the amount of
pollen recovered in these sediments is so low that the Beringian landscape during
the peak of the last glaciation was more likely to have been what he termed a
"polar desert," with little or only sparse vegetation, in no way was it possible that
this region could have supported large herds of mammals and thus, human hunters.
Guthrie has argued against this view by pointing out that radiocarbon analysis of
mammoth, horse, and bison bones from Beringian deposits revealed that the bones
date to the period of most intense glaciation.
The argument seemed to be at a standstill until a number of recent studies resulted
in a spectacular suite of new finds. The first was the discovery of a 1,000-square-
kilometer preserved patch of Beringian vegetation dating to just over 17,000 years
ago—the peak of the last ice age. The plants were preserved under a thick ash fall
from a volcanic eruption. Investigations of the plants found grasses, sedges,
mosses, and many other varieties in a nearly continuous cover, as was predicted by
[450]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Guthrie. But this vegetation had a thin root mat with no soil formation,
demonstrating that there was little long-term stability in plant cover, a finding
supporting some of the arguments of Colinvaux. A mixture of continuous but thin
vegetation supporting herds of large mammals is one that seems plausible and
realistic with the available data.
www.ZabanExam.com
[451]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Wind Pollination
Pollen, a powdery substance, which is produced by flowering plants and contains
male reproductive cells, is usually carried from plant to plant by insects or birds,
but some plants rely on the wind to carry their pollen. Wind pollination is often
seen as being primitive and wasteful in costly pollen and yet it is surprisingly
common, especially in higher latitudes. Wind is very good at moving pollen a long
way; pollen can be blown for hundreds of kilometers, and only birds can get pollen
anywhere near as far. The drawback is that wind is obviously unspecific as to
where it takes the pollen. It is like trying to get a letter to a friend at the other end
of the village by climbing onto the roof and throwing an armful of letters into the
air and hoping that one will end up in the friend's garden. For the relatively few
dominant tree species that make up temperate forests, where there are many
individuals of the same species within pollen range, this is quite a safe gamble. If a
number of people in the village were throwing letters off roofs, your friend would
be bound to get one. By contrast, in the tropics, where each tree species has few,
widely scattered individuals, the chance of wind blowing pollen to another
individual is sufficiently slim that animals are a safer bet as transporters of pollen.
Even tall trees in the tropics are usually not wind pollinated despite being in windy
conditions. In a similar way, trees in temperate forests that are insect pollinated
tend to grow as solitary, widely spread individuals.
Since wind-pollinated flowers have no need to attract insects or other animals, they
have dispensed with bright petals, nectar, and scent. These are at best a waste and
at worst an impediment to the transfer of pollen in the air. The result is
insignificant-looking flowers and catkins (dense cylindrical clusters of small,
petalless flowers).
[452]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Wind pollination does, of course, require a lot of pollen. Birch and hazel trees can
produce 5.5 and 4 million grains per catkin, respectively. There are various
adaptations to help as much of the pollen go as far as possible. Most deciduous
wind-pollinated trees (which shed their leaves every fall) produce their pollen in
the spring while the branches are bare of leaves to reduce the surrounding surfaces
that “compete" with the stigmas (the part of the flower that receives the pollen) for
pollen.Evergreen conifers, which do not shed their leaves, have less to gain from
spring flowering, and, indeed, some flower in the autumn or winter.
Pollen produced higher in the top branches is likely to go farther: it is windier (and
gustier) and the pollen can be blown farther before hitting the ground. Moreover,
dangling catkins like hazel hold the pollen in until the wind is strong enough to
bend them, ensuring that pollen is only shed into the air when the wind is blowing
hard. Weather is also important. Pollen is shed primarily when the air is dry to
prevent too much sticking to wet surfaces or being knocked out of the air by rain.
Despite these adaptations, much of the pollen fails to leave the top branches, and
only between 0.5 percent and 40 percent gets more than 100 meters away from the
parent. But once this far, significant quantities can go a kilometer or more. Indeed,
pollen can travel many thousands of kilometers at high altitudes. Since all this
pollen is floating around in the air, it is no wonder that wind-pollinated trees are a
major source of allergies.
Once the pollen has been snatched by the wind, the fate of the pollen is obviously
up to the vagaries of the wind, but not everything is left to chance. Windborne
pollen is dry, rounded, smooth, and generally smaller than that of insect-pollinated
plants. But size is a two-edged sword. Small grains may be blown farther but they
are also more prone to be whisked past the waiting stigma because smaller
particles tend to stay trapped in the fast-moving air that flows around the
[453]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
stigma. But stigmas create turbulence, which slows the air speed around them and
may help pollen stick to them.
[454]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Feeding Strategies In The Ocean
In the open sea, animals can often find food reliably available in particular regions
or seasons (e g., in coastal areas in springtime). In these circumstances, animals are
neither constrained to get the last calorie out of their diet nor is energy
conservation a high priority. In contrast, the food levels in the deeper layers of the
ocean are greatly reduced, and the energy constraints on the animals are much
more severe. To survive at those levels, animals must maximize their energy input,
finding and eating whatever potential food source may be present.
In the near-surface layers, there are many large, fast carnivores as well as an
immense variety of planktonic animals, which feed on plankton (small, free-
floating plants or animals) by filtering them from currents of water that pass
through a specialized anatomical structure. These filter-feeders thrive in the well-
illuminated surface waters because oceans have so many very small organisms,
from bacteria to large algae to larval crustaceans. Even fishes can become
successful filter-feeders in some circumstances. Although the vast majority of
marine fishes are carnivores, in near-surface regions of high productivity the
concentrations of larger phytoplankton (the plant component of plankton) are
sufficient to support huge populations of filter-feeding sardines and anchovies.
These small fishes use their gill filaments to strain out the algae that dominate such
areas. Sardines and anchovies provide the basis for huge commercial fisheries as
well as a food resource for large numbers of local carnivores, particularly seabirds.
At a much larger scale, baleen whales and whale sharks are also efficient filter-
feeders in productive coastal or polar waters, although their filtered particles
comprise small animals such as copepods and krill rather than phytoplankton.
[455]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Filtering seawater for its particulate nutritional content can be an energetically
demanding method of feeding, particularly when the current of water to be filtered
has to be generated by the organism itself, as is the case for all planktonic
animals. Particulate organic matter of at least 2.5 micrograms per cubic liter is
required to provide a filter-feeding planktonic organism with a net energy gain.
This value is easily exceeded in most coastal waters, but in the deep sea, the levels
of organic matter range from next to nothing to around 7 micrograms per cubic
liter. Even though mean levels may mask much higher local concentrations, it is
still the case that many deep-sea animals are exposed to conditions in which a
normal filter-feeder would starve.
There are, therefore, fewer successful filter-feeders in deep water, and some of
those that are there have larger filtering systems to cope with the scarcity of
particles. Another solution for such animals is to forage in particular layers of
water where the particles may be more concentrated. Many of the groups of
animals that typify the filter-feeding lifestyle in shallow water have deep-sea
representatives that have become predatory. Their filtering systems, which reach
such a high degree of development in shallow- water species, are greatly reduced.
Alternative methods of active or passive prey capture have been evolved, including
trapping and seizing prey, entangling prey, and sticky tentacles.
In the deeper waters of the oceans, there is a much greater tendency for animals to
await the arrival of food particles or prey rather than to search them out actively
(thus minimizing energy expenditure). This has resulted in a more stealthy style of
feeding, with the consequent emphasis on lures and/or the evolution of elongated
appendages that increase the active volume of water controlled or monitored by the
animal. Another consequence of the limited availability of prey is that many
animals have developed ways of coping with much larger food particles, relative to
[456]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
their own body size, than the equivalent shallower species can process. Among the
fishes there is a tendency for the teeth and jaws to become appreciably enlarged. In
such creatures, not only are the teeth hugely enlarged and/or the jaws elongated but
the size of the mouth opening may be greatly increased by making the jaw
articulations so flexible that they can be effectively dislocated. Very large or long
teeth provide almost no room for cutting the prey into a convenient size for
swallowing, the fish must gulp the prey down whole.
[457]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 46
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[458]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The Origins of Writing
It was in Egypt and Mesopotamia (modern-day Iraq) that civilization arose, and it
is there that we find the earliest examples of that keyfeature of civilization, writing.
These examples, in the form of inscribed clay tablets that date to shortly before
3000 B.C.E., have been discovered among the archaeological remains of the
Sumerians, a gifted people settled in southern Mesopotamia.
The Egyptians were not far behind in developing writing, but we cannot follow the
history of their writing in detail because they used a perishable writing material. In
ancient times the banks of the Nile were lined with papyrus plants, and from the
papyrus reeds the Egyptians made a form of paper; it was excellent in quality but,
like any paper, fragile. Mesopotamia’s rivers boasted no such useful reeds, but its
land did provide good clay, and as a consequence the clay tablet became the
standard material. Though clumsy and bulky it has a virtue dear to archaeologists:
it is durable. Fire, for example, which is death to papyrus paper or other writing
materials such as leather and wood, simply bakes it hard, thereby making it even
more durable. So when a conqueror set a Mesopotamian palace ablaze, he helped
ensure the survival of any clay tablets in it. Clay, moreover, is cheap, and forming
it into tablets is easy, factors that helped the clay tablet become the preferred
writing material not only throughout Mesopotamia but far outside it as well, in
Syria, Asia Minor, Persia, and even for a while in Crete and Greece. Excavators
have unearthed clay tablets in all these lands. In the Near East they remained in use
for more than two and a half millennia, and in certain areas they lasted down to the
beginning of the common era until finally yielding, once and for all, to more
convenient alternatives.
[459]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The Sumerians perfected a style of writing suited to clay. This script consists of
simple shapes, basically just wedge shapes and lines that could easily be incised in
soft clay with a reed or wooden stylus; scholars have dubbed it cuneiform from the
wedge-shaped marks (cunei in Latin) that are its hallmark. Although the
ingredients are merely wedges and lines, there are hundreds of combinations of
these basic forms that stand for different sounds or words. Learning these complex
signs required long training and much practice; inevitably, literacy was largely
limited to a small professional class, the scribes.
The Akkadians conquered the Sumerians around the middle of the third
millennium B.C.E., and they took over the various cuneiform signs used for
writing Sumerian and gave them sound and word values that fit their own
language. The Babylonians and Assyrians did the same, and so did peoples in Syria
and Asia Minor. The literature of the Sumerians was treasured throughout the Near
East, and long after Sumerian ceased to be spoken, the Babylonians and Assyrians
and others kept it alive as a literary language, the way Europeans kept Latin alive
after the fall of Rome. For the scribes of these non-Sumerian languages, training
was doubly demanding since they had to know the values of the various cuneiform
signs for Sumerian as well as for their own language.
The contents of the earliest clay tablets are simple notations of numbers of
commodities—animals, jars, baskets, etc. Writing, it would appear, started as a
primitive form of bookkeeping. Its use soon widened to document the
multitudinous things and acts that are involved in daily life, from simple
inventories of commodities to complicated governmental rules and regulations.
Archaeologists frequently find clay tablets in batches. The batches, some of which
contain thousands of tablets, consist for the most part of documents of the types
just mentioned: bills, deliveries, receipts, inventories, loans, marriage contracts,
[460]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
divorce settlements, court judgments, and so on. These records of factual matters
were kept in storage to be available for reference-they were, in effect, files, or, to
use the term preferred by specialists in the ancient Near East, archives. Now and
then these files include pieces of writing that are of a distinctly different order,
writings that do not merely record some matter of fact but involve creative
intellectual activity. They range from simple textbook material to literature-and
they make an appearance very early, even from the third millennium B C E.
www.ZabanExam.com
[461]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The Commercial Revolution in Medieval
Europe
Beginning in the 1160s, the opening of new silver mines in northern Europe led to
the minting and circulation of vast quantities of silver coins. The widespread use of
cash greatly increased the volume of international trade. Business procedures
changed radically. The individual traveling merchant who alone handled virtually
all aspects of exchange evolved into an operation involving three separate types of
merchants: the sedentary merchant who ran the "home office" financing and
organizing the firm's entire export-import trade; the carriers who transported goods
by land and sea; and the company agents resident in cities abroad who, on the
advice of the home office, looked after sales and procurements.
Commercial correspondence, unnecessary when one
businessperson oversaw everything and made direct bargains with buyers and
sellers, multiplied. Regular courier service among commercial cities began.
Commercial accounting became more complex when firms had to deal with
shareholders, manufacturers, customers, branch offices, employees, and competing
firms. Tolls on roads became high enough to finance what has been called a road
revolution, involving new surfaces and bridges, new passes through the Alps, and
new inns and hospices for travelers. The growth of mutual trust among merchants
facilitated the growth of sales on credit and led to new developments in finance,
such as the bill of exchange, a device that made the long, slow, and very dangerous
shipment of coins unnecessary.
The ventures of the German Hanseatic League illustrate these advancements. The
Hanseatic League was a mercantile association of European towns dating from
[462]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
1159. The league grew by the end of the fourteenth century to include about 200
cities from Holland to Poland. Across regular, well- defined trade routes along the
Baltic and North seas, the ships of league cities carried furs, wax, copper, fish,
grain, timber, and wine. These goods were exchanged for finished products, mainly
cloth and salt, from western cities. At cities such as Bruges and London, Hanseatic
merchants secured special trading concessions, exempting them from all tolls and
allowing them to trade at local fairs. Hanseatic merchants established foreign
trading centers, the most famous of which was the London Steelyard, a walled
community with warehouses, offices, a church, and residential quarters for
company representatives. By the late thirteenth century, Hanseatic merchants had
developed an important business technique, the business register. Merchants
publicly recorded their debts and contracts and received a league guarantee for
them. This device proved a decisive factor in the later development of credit and
commerce in northern Europe.
These developments added up to what one modern scholar has called "a
commercial revolution." In the long run, the commercial revolution of the High
Middle Ages (a d 1000-1300) brought about radical change in European society.
One remarkable aspect of this change was that the commercial classes constituted a
small part of the total population—never more than 10 percent. They exercised an
influence far in excess of their numbers. The commercial revolution created a great
deal of new wealth, which meant a higher standard of living. The existence of
wealth did not escape the attention of kings and other rulers. Wealth could be
taxed, and through taxation, kings could create strong and centralized states. In the
years to come, alliances with the middle classes were to enable kings to weaken
aristocratic interests and build the states that came to be called modern.
[463]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The commercial revolution also provided the opportunity for thousands of
agricultural workers to improve their social position. The slow but steady
transformation of European society from almost completely rural and isolated to
relatively more urban constituted the greatest effect of the commercial revolution
that began in the eleventh century. Even so, merchants and business people did not
run medieval communities, except in central and northern Italy and in the county
of Flanders. Most towns remained small. The nobility and churchmen determined
the predominant social attitudes, values, and patterns of thought and behavior. The
commercial changes of the eleventh through fourteenth centuries did however, lay
the economic foundation for the development of urban life and culture.
[464]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Ecosystem Diversity and Stability
Conservation biologists have long been concerned that species extinction could
have significant consequences for the stability of entire ecosystems—groups of
interacting organisms and the physical environment that they inhabit. An
ecosystem could survive the loss of some species, but if enough species were lost,
the ecosystem would be severely degraded. In fact, it is possible that the loss of a
single important species could start a cascade of extinctions that might
dramatically change an entire ecosystem. A good illustration of this occurred after
sea otters were eliminated from some Pacific kelp (seaweed) bed ecosystems: the
kelp beds were practically obliterated too because in the absence of sea otter
predation, sea urchin populations exploded and consumed most of the kelp and
other macroalgae.
It is usually claimed that species-rich ecosystems tend to be more stable than
species-poor ecosystems. Three mechanisms by which higher diversity increases
ecosystem stability have been proposed. First, if there are more species in an
ecosystem, then its food web will be more complex, with
greater redundancy among species in terms of their nutritional roles. In other
words, in a rich system if a species is lost, there is a good chance that other species
will take over its function as prey, predator, producer, decomposer, or whatever
role it played. Second, diverse ecosystems may be less likely to be invaded by new
species, notably exotics (foreign species living outside their native range), that
would disrupt the ecosystem’s structure and function. Third, in a species-rich
ecosystem, diseases may spread more slowly because most species will be
relatively less abundant, thus increasing the average distance between individuals
of the same species and hampering disease transmission among individuals.
[465]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Scientific evidence to illuminate these ideas has been slow in coming, and many
shadows remain. One of the first studies to provide data supporting a relationship
between diversity and stability examined how grassland plants responded to a
drought. Researchers D. Tilman and J A. Downing used the ratio of above-ground
biomass in 1988 (after two years of drought) to that in 1986 (predrought) in 207
plots in a grassland field in the Cedar Creek Natural History Area in Minnesota as
an index of ecosystem response to disruption by drought. In an experiment that
began in 1982, they compared these values with the number of plant species in
each plot and discovered that the plots with a greater number of plant species
experienced a less dramatic reduction in biomass. Plots with more than ten species
had about half as much biomass in 1988 as in 1986, whereas those with fewer than
five species only produced roughly one-eighth as much biomass after the two-year
drought. Apparently, species-rich plots were likely to contain some drought-
resistant plant species that grew better in drought years, compensating for the poor
growth of less-tolerant species.
To put this result in more general terms, a species-rich ecosystem may be more
stable because it is more likely to have species with a wide array of responses to
variable conditions such as droughts. Furthermore, a species-rich ecosystem is
more likely to have species with similar ecological functions, so that if a species is
lost from an ecosystem, another species, probably a competitor, is likely to flourish
and occupy its functional role. Both of these, variability in responses and
functional redundancy, could be thought of as insurance against disturbances.
The Minnesota grassland research has been widely accepted as strong evidence for
the diversity- stability theory; however, its findings have been questioned, and
similar studies on other ecosystems have not always found a positive relationship
between diversity and stability. Clearly, this is a complex issue that requires further
[466]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
field research with a broad spectrum of ecosystems and species: grassland plants
and computer models will only take us so far. In the end, despite insightful
attempts to detect some general patterns, we may find it very difficult to reduce
this topic to a simple, universal truth.
[467]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 47
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[468]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Roman Cultural Influence on Britain
After the Roman Empire’s conquest of Britain in the first century A.D., the
presence of administrators, merchants, and troops on British soil, along with the
natural flow of ideas and goods from the rest of the empire, had an enormous
influence on life in the British Isles. Cultural influences were of three types: the
bringing of objects, the transfer of craft workers, and the introduction of massive
civil architecture. Many objects were not art in even the broadest sense and
comprised utilitarian items of clothing, utensils, and equipment. We should not
underestimate the social status associated with such mundane possessions which
had not previously been available. The flooding of Britain with red-gloss pottery
from Gaul (modern-day France), decorated with scenes from Classical mythology,
probably brought many into contact with the styles and artistic concepts of the
Greco-Roman world for the first time, whether or not the symbolism was
understood. Mass-produced goods were accompanied by fewer more aesthetically
impressive objects such as statuettes. Such pieces perhaps first came with officials
for their own religious worship; others were then acquired by native leaders as
diplomatic gifts or by purchase. Once seen by the natives, such objects created a
fashion which rapidly spread through the province.
In the most extreme instances, natives literally bought the whole package of
Roman culture. The Fishbourne villa, built in the third quarter of the first century
A.D., probably for the native client king Cogidubnus, amply illustrates his Roman
pretensions. It was constructed in the latest Italian style with imported marbles and
stylish mosaics. It was lavishlyfurnished with imported sculptures and other
Classical objects. A visitor from Rome would have recognized its owner as a
participant in the contemporary culture of the empire, not at all provincial in taste.
[469]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Even if those from the traditional families looked down on him, they would have
been unable to dismiss him as uncultured. Although exceptional, this demonstrates
how new cultural symbols bound provincials to the identify of the Roman world.
Such examples established a standard to be copied. One result was an influx of
craft worker, particularly those skilled in artistic media like stone-carving which
had not existed before the conquest. Civilian workers came mostly from Gaul and
Germany. The magnificent temple built beside the sacred spring at Bath was
constructed only about twenty years after the conquest. Its detail shows that it was
carved by artists from northeast Gaul. In the absence of a tradition of Classical
stone-carving and building, the desire to develop Roman amenities would have
been difficult to fulfill. Administrators thus used their personal contacts to put the
Britons in touch with architects and masons. As many of the officials in Britain had
strong links with Gaul, it is not surprising that early Roman Britain owes much to
craft workers from that area. Local workshops did develop and stylistically similar
groups of sculpture show how skills in this new medium became widespread.
Likewise skills in the use of mosaic, wall painting, ceramic decoration, and metal-
working developed throughout the province with the eventual emergence of
characteristically Romano-British styles.
This art had a major impact on the native peoples, and one of the most importance
factors was a change in the scale of buildings. Pre-Roman Britain was highly
localized, with people rarely traveling beyond their own region. On occasion large
groups amassed for war or religious festivals, but society remained centered on
small communities. Architecture of this era reflected this with even the largest of
the fortified towns and hill forts containing no more than clusters of medium-sized
structures. The spaces inside even the largest roundhouses were modest, and the
use of rounded shapes and organic building materials gave buildings a human
[470]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
scale. But the effect of Roman civil architecture was significant;the sheer size of
space enclosed within buildings like the basilica of London must have been
astonishing. This was an architecture of dominance in which subject peoples were
literally made to feel small by buildings that epitomized imperial
power. Supremacy was accentuated by the unyielding straight lines of both
individual buildings and planned settlements since these too provided a marked
contrast with the natural curvilinear shapes dominant in the native realm.
www.ZabanExam.com
[471]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Termite Ingenuity
Termites, social insects which live in colonies that, in some species, contain 2
million individuals or more, are often incorrectly referred to as white ants. But they
are certainly not ants. Termites, unlike ants, have gradual metamorphosis with only
three life stage: egg, nymph, and adult. Ants and the other social members of their
order, certain bees and wasps, have complete metamorphosis in four life stages;
egg, larva, pupa, and adult. The worker and soldier castes of social ants, bees, and
wasps consist of only females, all daughters of a single queen that mated soon after
she matured and thereafter never mated again. The worker and soldier castes of
termites consist of both males and females, and the queen lives permanently with a
male consort.
Since termites are small and soft-bodied, they easily become desiccated and must
live in moist places with a high relative humidity. They do best when the relative
humidity in their nest is above 96 percent and the temperature is fairly high, an
optimum of about 79°F for temperate zone species and about 86°F for tropical
species. Subterranean termites, the destructive species that occurs commonly
throughout the eastern United States, attain these conditions by nesting in moist
soil that is in contact with wood, their only food. The surrounding soil keeps the
nest moist and tends to keep the temperature at a more or less favorable level.
When it is cold in winter, subterranean termites move to burrows below the frost
line.
Some tropical termites are more ingenious engineers, constructing huge above-
ground nests with built-in “air conditioning” that keeps the nest moist, at a constant
temperature, and well supplied with oxygen. Among the most architecturally
advanced of these termites is an African species, Macrotermes
[472]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
natalensis. Renowned Swiss entomologist Martin Luscher described the mounds of
this fungus-growing species as being as much as 16 feet tall, 16 feet in diameter at
their base, and with a cement-like wall of soil mixed with termite saliva that is
from 16 to 23 inches thick. The thick and dense wall of the mound insulates the
interior microclimate from the variations in humidity and temperature of the
outside atmosphere. Several narrow and relatively thin-walled ridges on the outside
of the mound extend from near its base almost to its top.
According to Luscher, a medium-sized nest of Macrotermes has a population of
about 2 million individuals. The metabolism of so many termites and of the fungus
that they grow in their gardens as food helps keep the interior of the nest warm and
supplies some moisture to the air in the nest. The termites saturate the atmosphere
of the nest, bringing it to about 100 percent relative humidity, by carrying water up
from the soil.
But how is this well-insulated nest ventilated? Its many occupants require over 250
quarts of oxygen (more than 1,200 quarts of air) per day. How can so much oxygen
diffuse through the thick walls of the mound? Even the pores in the wall are filled
with water, which almost stops the diffusion of gases. The answer lies in the
construction of the nest. The interior consists of a large central core in which the
fungus is grown, below it is “cellar” of empty space, above it is an “attic” of empty
space, and within the ridges on the outer wall of the nest, there are many small
tunnels that connect the cellar and the attic. The warm air in the fungus gardens
rises through the nest up to the attic. From the attic, the air passes into the tunnels
in the ridges and flows back down to the cellar. Gases, mainly oxygen coming in
and carbon dioxide going out, easily diffuse into or out of the ridges, since their
walls are thin and their surface area is large because they protrude far out from the
wall of the mound. Thus air that flows down into the cellar through the ridges is
[473]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
relatively rich in oxygen, and has lost much of its carbon dioxide. It supplies the
nest’s inhabitants with fresh oxygen as it rises through the fungus-growing area
back up to the attic.
[474]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Coral Reefs
An important environment that is more or less totally restricted to the intertropical
zone is the coral reef. Coral reefs are found where the ocean water temperature is
not less than 21 °C, where there is a firm substratum, and where the seawater is not
rendered too dark by excessive amounts of river-borne sediment. They will not
grow in very deep water, so a platform within 30 to 40 meters of the surface is a
necessary prerequisite for their development. Their physical structure is dominated
by the skeletons of corals, which are carnivorous animals living off zooplankton.
However, in addition to corals there are enormous quantities of algae, some
calcareous, which help to build the reefs. The size of reefs is variable. Some atolls
are very large—Kwajelein in the Marshall Islands of the South Pacific is 120
kilometers long and as much as 24 kilometers across-but most are very much
smaller, and rise only a few meters above the water. The 2,000-
kilometer complex of reefs known as the Great Barrier Reef, which forms a
gigantic natural breakwater off the northeast coast of Australia, is by far the
greatest coral structure on Earth.
Coral reefs have fascinated scientists for almost 200 years, and some of the
most pertinent observations of them were made in the 1830s by Charles Darwin on
the voyage of the Beagle. He recognized that there were three major kinds:
fringing reefs, barrier reefs, and atolls; and he saw that they were related to each
other in a logical and gradational sequence. A fringing reef is one that lies close to
the shore of some continent or island. Its surface forms an uneven and rather rough
platform around the coast, about the level of low water, and its outer edge slopes
downwards into the sea. Between the fringing reef and the land there is sometimes
a small channel or lagoon. When the lagoon is wide and deep and the reef lies at
[475]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
some distance from the shore and rises from deep water it is called a barrier reef.
An atoll is a reef in the form of a ring or horseshoe with a lagoon in the center.
Darwin s theory was that the succession from one coral reef type to another could
be achieved by the upward growth of coral from a sinking platform, and that there
would be a progression from a fringing reef, through the barrier reef stage until,
with the disappearance through subsidence (sinking) of the central island, only a
reef-enclosed lagoon or atoll would survive. A long time after Darwin put forward
this theory, some deep boreholes were drilled in the Pacific atolls in the 1950s. The
drill holes passed through more than a thousand meters of coral before reaching the
rock substratum of the ocean floor, and indicated that the coral had been growing
upward for tens of millions of years as Earth's crust subsided at a rate of between
15 and 51 meters per million years. Darwin s theory was therefore proved basically
correct. There are some submarine islands called guyots and seamounts, in which
subsidence associated with sea-floor spreading has been too speedy for coral
growth to keep up.
Like mangrove swamps, coral reefs are extremely important habitats. Their
diversity of coral genera is greatest in the warm waters of the Indian Ocean and the
western Pacific. Indeed, they have been called the marine version of the tropical
rain forest, rivaling their terrestrial counterparts in both richness of species and
biological productivity. They also have significance because they provide coastal
protection, opportunities for recreation, and are potential sources of substances like
medicinal drugs. At present they are coming under a variety of threats, of which
two of the most important are dredging and the effects of increased siltation
brought about by accelerated erosion from neighboring land areas.
[476]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 48
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[477]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Chinese Population Growth
Increases in population have usually been accompanied (indeed facilitated) by an
increase in trade. In the Western experience, commerce provided the conditions
that allowed industrialization to get started, which in turn led to growth in science,
technology, industry, transport, communications, social change, and the like that
we group under the broad term of “development.” However, the massive increase
in population that in Europe was at first attributed to industrialization starting in
the eighteenth century occurred also and at the same period in China, even though
there was no comparable industrialization.
It is estimated that the Chinese population by 1600 was close to 150 million. The
transition between the Ming and Qing dynasties (the seventeenth century) may
have seen a decline, but from 1741 to 1851 the annual figures rose steadily and
spectacularly, perhaps beginning with 143 million and ending with 432 million. If
we accept these totals, we are confronted with a situation in which the Chinese
population doubled in the 50 years from 1790 to 1840. If, with greater caution, we
assume lower totals in the early eighteenth century and only 400 million in 1850,
we still face a startling fact: something like a doubling of the vast Chinese
population in the century before Western contact, foreign trade, and
industrialization could have had much effect.
To explain this sudden increase we cannot point to factors constant in Chinese
society but must find conditions or a combination of factors that were newly
effective in this period. Among these is the almost complete internal peace
maintained under Manchu rule during the eighteenth century. There was also an
increase in foreign trade through Guangzhou (southern China) and some
improvement of transportation within the empire. Control of disease, like the
[478]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
checking of smallpox by variolation may have been important. But of most critical
importance was the food supply.
Confronted with a multitude of unreliable figures, economists have compared the
population records with the aggregate data for cultivated land area and grain
production in the six centuries since 1368. Assuming that China’s population in
1400 was about 80 million, the economist Dwight Perkins concludes that its
growth to 700 million or more in the 1960s was made possible by a steady increase
in the grain supply, which evidently grew five or six times between 1400 and 1800
and rose another 50 percent between 1800 and 1965. This increase of food supply
was due perhaps half to the increase of cultivated area, particularly by migration
and settlement in the central and western provinces, and half to greater productivity
- the farmers’ success in raising more crops per unit of land.
This technological advance took many forms: one was the continual introduction
from the south of earlier-ripening varieties of rice, which made possible double-
cropping (the production of two harvests per year from one field). New crops such
as corn (maize) and sweet potatoes as well as peanuts and tobacco were introduced
from the Americas. Corn, for instance, can be grown on the dry soil and marginal
hill land of North China, where it is used for food, fuel, and fodder and provides
something like one-seventh of the food energy available in the area. The sweet
potato, growing in sandy soil and providing more food energy per unit of land than
other crops, became the main food of the poor in much of the South China rice
area.
Productivity in agriculture was also improved by capital investments, first of all in
irrigation. From 1400 to 1900 the total of irrigated land seems to have increased
almost three times. There was also a gain in farm tools, draft animals, and
fertilizer, to say nothing of the population growth itself, which increased half again
[479]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
as fast as cultivated land area and so increased the ratio of human hands available
per unit of land. Thus the rising population was fed by a more intensive
agriculture, applying more labor and fertilizer to the land.
www.ZabanExam.com
[480]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Determining Dinosaur Diet
Determining what extinct dinosaurs ate is difficult, but we can infer some aspects
of their dietary preferences. Traditionally, this information has been derived from
direct evidence, such as stomach contents, and indirect evidence, such as
establishing a correlation between particular body characteristics and diets of
living animals and then inferring habits for dinosaurs.
Animals such as house cats and dogs have large, stabbing canine teeth at the front
of the mouth and smaller, equally sharp teeth farther back in their jaws. Many of
these animals are also armed with sharp claws. The advantage of teeth and claws as
predatory tools is obvious. Now consider animals like cows, horses, rabbits, and
mice. These animals have flat teeth at the back of the jaw that are analogous to and
have the same function as grindstones. Unlike the meat-slicing and stabbing teeth
of carnivores, the teeth of these animals grind and shred plant material before
digestion.
More clues exist in other parts of the skull. The jaw joint of carnivores such as
dogs and cats has the mechanical advantage of being at the same level as the tooth
row, allowing the jaws to close with tremendous speed and forcing the upper teeth
to occlude against the lower teeth with great precision. In herbivorous animals,
rapid jaw closure is less important. Because the flat teeth of herbivores work like
grindstones, however, the jaws mush move both side to side and front to back. The
jaw joints of many advanced herbivores, such as cows, lie at a different level than
the tooth row, allowing transverse tearing, shredding, and compression of plant
material. If we extend such observations to extinct dinosaurs, we can infer dietary
preferences (such as carnivory and herbivory), even though we cannot determine
the exact diet. The duck-billed dinosaurs known as hadrosaurs are a good example
[481]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
of a group whose jaw joint is below the level of the tooth row, which probably
helped them grind up tough, fibrous vegetation.
Paleontologists would like to be much more specific about a dinosaur’s diet than
simply differentiating carnivore from herbivore. This finer level of resolution
requires direct fossil evidence of dinosaur meals. Stomach contents are only rarely
preserved, but when present, allow us to determine exactly what these animals
were eating.
In the stomach contents of specimens of Coelophysis (a small, long-necked
dinosaur) are bones from juvenile animals of the same species. At one time, these
were thought to represent embryonic animals, suggesting that this small dinosaur
gave birth to live young rather than laying eggs. Further research indicated that the
small dinosaurs were too large and too well developed to be prehatching young. In
addition, the juveniles inside the body cavity were of different sizes. All the
evidence points to the conclusion that these are the remains of prey items and that,
as an adult, Coelophysis was at least in part a cannibal.
Fossilized stomach contents are not restricted to carnivorous dinosaurs. In a few
rare cases, most of them “mummies” (unusually well preserved specimens),
fossilized plant remains have been found inside the body cavity of hadrosaurs.
Some paleontologists have argued that these represent stream accumulations rather
than final meals. The best known of these cases is the second Edmontosaurus
mummy collected by the Sternbergs. In the chest cavity of this specimen, which is
housed in the Senckenberg Museum in Germany, are the fossil remains of conifer
needles, twigs, seeds, and fruits. Similar finds in Corythosaurus specimens from
Alberta, Canada, have also been reported, indicating that at least two kinds of Late
Cretaceous hadrosaurs fed on the sorts of tress that are common in today’s boreal
woodlands.
[482]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
A second form of direct evidence comes from coprolites (fossilized bodily waste).
Several dinosaur fossil localities preserve coprolites. Coprolites yield unequivocal
evidence about the dietary habits of dinosaurs. Many parts of plants and animals
are extremely resistant to the digestive systems of animals and pass completely
through the body with little or no alteration. Study of coprolites has indicated that
the diets of some herbivorous dinosaurs were relatively diverse, while other
dinosaurs appear to have been specialists, feeding on particular types of plants. The
problem with inferring diets from coprolites is the difficulty in accurately
associating a particular coprolite with a specific dinosaur.
[483]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Climate and Urban Development
For more than a hundred years, it has been known that cities are generally warmer
than surrounding rural areas. This region of city warmth, known as the urban heat
island, can influence the concentration of air pollution. However, before we look at
its influence, let’s see how the heat island actually forms.
The urban heat island is due to industrial and urban development. In rural areas, a
large part of the incoming solar energy is used in evaporating water from
vegetation and soil. In cities, where less vegetation and exposed soil exist, the
majority of the Sun’s energy is absorbed by urban structures and asphalt. Hence,
during warm daylight hours, less evaporative cooling in cities allows surface
temperatures to rise higher than in rural areas. The cause of the urban heat island is
quite involved. Depending on the location, time of year, and time of day, any or all
of the following differences between cities and their surroundings can be
important: albedo (reflectivity of the surface), surface roughness, emissions of
heat, emissions of moisture, and emissions of particles that affect net radiation and
the growth of cloud droplets.
At night, the solar energy (stored as vast quantities of heat in city buildings and
roads) is slowly released into the city air. Additional city heat is given off at night
(and during the day) by vehicles and factories, as well as by industrial and
domestic heating and cooling units. The release of heat energy is retarded by the
tall vertical city walls that do not allow infrared radiation to escape as readily as
does the relatively level surface of the surrounding countryside. The slow release
of heat tends to keep nighttime city temperatures higher than those of the faster-
cooling rural areas. Overall, the heat island is strongest (1) at night when
compensating sunlight is absent; (2) during the winter, when nights are longer and
[484]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
there is more heat generated in the city; and (3) when the region is dominated by a
high-pressure area with light winds, clear skies, and less humid air. Over time,
increasing urban heat islands affect climatological temperature records, producing
artificial warming in climatic records taken in cities. This warming, therefore, must
be accounted for in interpreting climate change over the past century.
The constant outpouring of pollutants into the environment may influence the
climate of the city. Certain particles reflect solar radiation, thereby reducing the
sunlight that reaches the surface. Some particles serve as nuclei upon which water
and ice form. Water vapor condenses onto these particles when the relative
humidity is as low as 70 percent, forming haze that greatly reduces visibility.
Moreover, the added nuclei increase the frequency of city fog.
Studies suggest that precipitation may be greater in cities than in the surrounding
countryside; this phenomenon may be due in part to the increased roughness of city
terrain, brought on by large structures that cause surface air to slow and gradually
converge. This piling up of air over the city then slowly rises, much
like toothpaste does when its tube is squeezed. At the same time, city heat warms
the surface air, making it more unstable, which enhances risings air motions,
which, in turn, aids in forming clouds and thunderstorms. This process helps
explain why both tend to be more frequent over cities.
On clear still nights when the heat island is pronounced, a small thermal low-
pressure area forms over the city. Sometimes a light breeze—called a country
breeze—blows from the countryside into the city. If there are major industrial areas
along the outskirts, pollutants are carried into the heat of town, where they tend to
concentrate. Such an event is especially probable if vertical mixing and dispersion
of pollutants are inhibited. Pollutants from urban areas may even affect the weather
downwind from them.
[485]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 49
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[486]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Ancient Coastlines
Information on past climates is of primary relevance to archaeology because of
what it tells us about the effects on the land and on the resources that people
needed to survive. The most crucial effect of climate was on the sheer quantity of
land available in each period, measurable by studying ancient coastlines. These
have changed constantly through time, even in relatively recent periods, as can be
seen from the Neolithic stone circle of Er Lannic, in Brittany, France (once inland
but now half submerged on an island) or medieval villages in east Yorkshire,
England, that have tumbled into the sea in the last few centuries as the North Sea
gnaws its way westward and erodes the cliffs. Conversely, silts deposited by rivers
sometimes push the sea farther back, creating new land, as at Ephesus in western
Turkey, a port on the coast in Roman times but today some five kilometers inland.
Nevertheless, for archeologists concerned with the long periods of time of the
Paleolithic period, there are variations in coastlines of much greater magnitude to
consider. The expansion and contraction of the continental glaciers caused huge
and uneven rises and falls in sea levels worldwide. When the ice sheets grew, the
sea level would drop as water became locked up in the glaciers; when the ice
melted, the sea level would rise again. Falls in sea level often exposed a number of
important land bridges, such as those linking Alaska to northeast Asia and Britain
to northwest Europe, a phenomenon with far-reaching effects not only on human
colonization of the globe but also on the environment as a whole - the flora and
fauna of isolated or insular areas were radically and often irreversibly affected.
Between Alaska and Asia today lies the Bering Strait, which is so shallow that a
fall in sea level of only four meters would turn it into a land bridge. When the ice
sheets were at their greatest extent some 18,000 years ago (the glacier maximum),
[487]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
it is thought that the fall was about 120 meters, which therefore created not merely
a bridge but a vast plain,1,000 kilometers from the north to the south, which has
been called Beringia. The existence of Beringia (and the extent to which it could
have supported human life) is one of the crucial pieces of evidence in the
continuing debate about the likely route and date of human colonization of the
New World.
The assessment of past rises and falls in sea level requires study of submerged land
surfaces off the coast and of raised or elevated beaches on land. Raised beaches
are remnants of former coastlines at higher levels relative to the present shoreline
and visible, for instance, along the Californian coast north of San Francisco. The
height of a raised beach above the present shoreline, however, does not generally
give a straightforward indication of the height of a former sea level. In the majority
of cases, the beaches lie at a higher level because the land has been raised up
through isostatic uplift or tectonic movement. Isostatic uplift of the land occurs
when the weight of ice is removed as temperatures rise, as at the end of an ice age;
it has affected coastlines, for example, in Scandinavia, Scotland, Alaska, and
Newfoundland during the postglacial period. Tectonic movements involve
displacements in the plates that make up Earth’s crust. Middle and Late Pleistocene
raised beaches in the Mediterranean are one instance of such movements.
Raised beaches often consist of areas of sand, pebbles, or dunes, sometimes
containing seashells or piles of debris comprising shells and bones of marine
animals used by humans. In Tokyo Bay, for example, shell mounds of the Jomon
period (about 10,000 to 300 B.C.E.)mark the position of the shoreline at a time of
maximum inundation by the sea (6,500-5,500 years ago),when, through tectonic
movement, the sea was three to five meters higher in relation to the contemporary
landmass of Japan than at present. Analysis of the shells themselves has confirmed
[488]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
the changes in marine topography, for it is only during the maximum phase that
subtropical species of mollusc are present, indicating a higher water temperature.
www.ZabanExam.com
[489]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Movable Type
Nothing divided the medieval world in Europe more decisively from the Early
Modern period than printing with movable type. It was a German invention and the
culmination of a complex process. The world of antiquity had recorded its writings
mainly on papyrus. Between 200 B.C and A.D 300, this was supplemented by
vellum, calf skin treated and then smoothed by pumice stone. To this in late
Roman times was added parchment, similarly made from the smoothed skin of
sheep or goats. In the early Middle Ages, Europe imported an industrial process
from China, which turned almost any kind of fibrous material into pulp that was
then spread in sheets. This was known as cloth parchment. By about 1150, the
Spanish had developed the first mill for making cheap paper (a
word contracted from "papyrus", which became the standard term). One of the
most important phenomena of the later Middle Ages was the growing availability
of cheap paper. Even in England, where technology lagged far behind, a sheet of
paper, or eight octavo pages, cost only a penny by the fifteenth century.
In the years 1446-1448, two German goldsmiths, Johannes Gutenberg and Johann
Fust, made use of cheap paper to introduce a critical improvement in the way
written pages were reproduced. Printing from wooden blocks was the old method;
what the Germans did was to invent movable type for the letterpress. It had three
merits: it could be used repeatedly until worn out; it was cast in metal from a mold
and so could be renewed without difficulty; and it made lettering uniform. In 1450,
Gutenberg began work on his Bible, the first printed book, known as the
Gutenberg. It was completed in 1455 and is a marvel. As Gutenberg, apart from
getting the key idea, had to solve a lot of practical problems, including imposing
paper and ink into the process and the actual printing itself, for which he adapted
[490]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
the screw press used by winemakers, it is amazing that his first product does not
look at all rudimentary. Those who handle it are struck by its clarity and quality.
Printing was one of those technical revolutions that developed its own momentum
at extraordinary speed. Europe in the fifteenth century was a place where
intermediate technology - that is, workshops with skilled craftspeople - was well
established and spreading fast, especially in Germany and Italy. Such workshops
were able to take on printing easily, and it thus became Europe's first true industry.
The process was aided by two factors: the new demand for cheap classical texts
and the translation of the Latin Bible into "modern" languages. Works of reference
were also in demand. Presses sprang up in several German cities, and by 1470,
Nuremberg, Germany had established itself as the center of the international
publishing trade, printing books from 24 presses and distributing them at trade fairs
all over western and central Europe. The old monastic scriptoria-monastery
workshops where monks copied texts by hand-worked closely alongside the new
presses, continuing to produce the luxury goods that movable-type printing could
not yet supply. Printing, however, was primarily aimed at a cheap mass sale.
Although there was no competition between the technologies, there was rivalry
between nations. The Italians made energetic and successful efforts to catch up
with Germany. Their most successful scriptorium quickly imported two leading
German printers to set up presses in their book-producing shop. German printers
had the disadvantage of working with the complex typeface that the Italians
sneeringly referred to as "Gothic" and that later became known as black
letter. Outside Germany, readers found this typeface disagreeable. The Italians, on
the other hand, had a clear typeface known as roman that became the type of the
future.
[491]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Hence, although the Germans made use of the paper revolution to introduce
movable type, the Italians went far to regain the initiative by their artistry. By 1500
there were printing firms in 60 German cities, but there were 150 presses in Venice
alone. However, since many nations and governments wanted their own presses,
the trade quickly became international. The cumulative impact of this industrial
spread was spectacular. Before printing, only the very largest libraries, of which
there were a dozen in Europe, had as many as 600 books. The total number of
books on the entire Continent was well under 100,000. But by 1500, after only 45
years of the printed book, there were 9 million in circulation.
[492]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Background for the Industrial Revolution
The Industrial Revolution had several roots, one of which was a commercial
revolution that, beginning as far back as the sixteenth century, accompanied
Europe’s expansion overseas. Both exports and imports showed spectacular
growth, particularly in England and France. An increasingly larger portion of the
stepped-up commercial activity was the result of trade with overseas colonies.
Imports included a variety of new beverages, spices, and ship’s goods around the
world and brought money flowing back. Europe’s economic institutions,
particularly those in England, were strong, had wealth available for new
investment, and seemed almost to be waiting for some technological breakthrough
that would expand their profit-making potential even more.
The breakthrough came in Great Britain, where several economic advantages
created a climate especially favorable to the encouragement of new technology.
One was its geographic location at the crossroads of international trade. Internally,
Britain was endowed with easily navigable natural waterway, which helped its
trade and communication with the world. Beginning in the 1770’s, it enjoyed a
boom in canal building, which helped make its domestic market more accessible.
Because water transportation was the cheapest means of carrying goods to market,
canals reduced prices and thus increased consumer demand. Great Britain also had
rich deposits of coal that fed the factories springing up in industrial and consumer
goods.
Another advantage was Britain’s large population of rural, agricultural wage
earners, as well as cottage workers, who had the potential of being more mobile
than peasants of some other countries. Eventually they found their way to the cities
or mining communities and provided the human power upon which the Industrial
[493]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Revolution was built. The British people were also consumers; the absence of
internal tariffs, such as those that existed in France or Italy or between the German
states, made Britain the largest free-trade area in Europe. Britain’s relatively stable
government also helped create an atmosphere conducive toindustrial progress.
Great Britain’s better-developed banking and credit system also helped speed the
industrial progress, as did the fact that it was the home of an impressive array of
entrepreneurs and inventors. Among them were a large number of nonconformists
whose religious principles encouraged thrift and industry rather than luxurious
living and who tended to pour their profits back into their business, thus providing
the basis for continued expansion.
A precursor to the Industrial Revolution was a revolution in agricultural
techniques. Ideas about agricultural reform developed first in Holland, where as
early as the mid-seventeenth century, such modern methods as crop rotation, heavy
fertilization, and diversification were all in use. Dutch peasant farmers were known
throughout Europe for their agricultural innovations, but as British markets and
opportunities grew, the English quickly learned from them. As early as the
seventeenth century the Dutch were helping them drain marshes and fens where,
with the help of advanced techniques, they grew new crops. By the mid-eighteenth
century new agricultural methods as well as selective breeding of livestock had
caught on throughout the country.
Much of the increased production was consumed by Great Britain’s burgeoning
population. At the same time, people were moving to the city, partly because of the
enclosure movement; that is, the fencing of common fields and pastures in order to
provide more compact, efficient privately held agricultural parcels that would
produce more goods and greater profits. In the sixteenth century enclosures were
usually used for creating sheep pastures, but by the eighteenth century new farming
[494]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
techniques made it advantageous for large landowners to seek enclosures in order
to improve agricultural production. Between 1714 and 1820 over 6 million acres of
English land were enclosed. As a result, many small, independent farmers were
forced to sell out simply because they could not compete. Non-landholding
peasants and cottage workers, who worked for wages and grazed cows or pigs on
the village common, were also hurt when the common was no longer available. It
was such people who began to flock to the cities seeking employment and who
found work in the factories that would transform the nation and, the world.
[495]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 50
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[496]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
American Railroads
In the United States, railroads spearheaded the second phase of the transportation
revolution by overtaking the previous importance of canals. The mid-1800s saw a
great expansion of American railroads. The major cities east of the Mississippi
River were linked by a spiderweb of railroad tracks. Chicago's growth illustrates
the impact of these rail links. In 1849 Chicago was a village of a few hundred
people with virtually no rail service. By 1860 it had become a city of 100,000,
served by eleven railroads. Farmers to the north and west of Chicago no longer had
to ship their grain, livestock, and dairy products down the Mississippi River to
New Orleans; they could now ship their products directly east. Chicago supplanted
New Orleans as the interior of America's main commercial hub.
The east-west rail lines stimulated the settlement and agricultural development of
the Midwest. By 1860 Illinois, Indiana, and Wisconsin had replaced Ohio,
Pennsylvania, and New York as the leading wheat-growing states. Enabling
farmers to speed their products to the East, railroads increased the value of
farmland and promoted additional settlement. In turn, population growth in
agricultural areas triggered industrial development in cities such as Chicago,
Davenport (Iowa), and Minneapolis, for the new settlers needed lumber for fences
and houses and mills to grind wheat into flour.
Railroads also propelled the growth of small towns along their routes. The Illinois
Central Railroad, which had more track than any other railroad in 1855, made
money not only from its traffic but also from real estate speculation. Purchasing
land for stations along its path, the Illinois Central then laid out towns around the
stations. The selection of Manteno, Illinois, as a stop of the Illinois Central, for
example, transformed the site from a crossroads without a single house in 1854
[497]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
into a bustling town of nearly a thousand in 1860, replete with hotels, lumberyards,
grain elevators, and gristmills. By the Civil War (1861-1865), few thought of the
railroad-linked Midwest as a frontier region or viewed its inhabitants as pioneers.
As the nation's first big business, the railroads transformed the conduct of business.
During the early 1830s, railroads, like canals, depended on financial aid from state
governments. With the onset of economic depression in the late 1830s, however,
state governments scrapped overly ambitious railroad projects. Convinced that
railroads burdened them with high taxes and blasted hopes, voters turned against
state aid, and in the early 1840s, several states amended their constitutions to bar
state funding for railroads and canals. The federal government took up some of the
slack, but federal aid did not provide a major stimulus to railroads before 1860.
Rather, part of the burden of finance passed to city and county governments in
agricultural areas that wanted to attract railroads. Such municipal governments, for
example, often gave railroads rights-of-way, grants of land for stations, and public
funds.
The dramatic expansion of the railroad network in the 1850s, however, strained the
financing capacity of local governments and required a turn toward private
investment, which had never been absent from the picture. Well aware of the
economic benefits of railroads, individuals living near them had long purchased
railroad stock issued by governments and had directly bought stock in railroads,
often paying by contributing their labor to building the railroads. But the large
railroads of the 1850s needed more capital than such small investors could
generate. Gradually, the center of railroad financing shifted to New York City, and
in fact, it was the railroad boom of the 1850s that helped make Wall Street in New
York City the nation's greatest capital market. The stocks of all the leading
railroads were traded on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange during the
[498]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
1850s. In addition, the growth of railroads turned New York City into the center of
modern investment firms. The investment firms evaluated the stock of railroads in
the smaller American cities and then found purchasers for these stocks in New
York City, Philadelphia, Paris, London, Amsterdam, and Hamburg. Controlling
the flow of funds to railroads, the investment bankers began to exert influence over
the railroads' internal affairs by supervising administrative reorganizations in times
of trouble.
[499]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The Achievement of Brazilian Independence
In contrast to the political anarchy, economic dislocation, and military destruction
in Spanish America, Brazil's drive toward independence from Portugal proceeded
as a relatively bloodless transition between 1808 and 1822. The idea of Brazilian
independence first arose in the late eighteenth century as a Brazilian reaction to the
Portuguese policy of tightening political and economic control over the colony in
the interests of the mother country. The first significant conspiracy against
Portuguese rule was organized from 1788-1799 in the province of Minas Gerais,
where rigid governmental control over the production and prices of gold and
diamonds, as well as heavy taxes, caused much discontent. But this conspiracy
never went beyond the stage of discussion and was easily discovered and crushed.
Other conspiracies in the late eighteenth century as well as a brief revolt in 1817
reflected the influence of republican ideas over sections of the elite and even the
lower strata of urban society. All proved abortive or were soon crushed. Were it
not for an accident of European history, the independence of Brazil might have
been long delayed.
The French invasion of Portugal in 1807 followed by the flight of the Portuguese
court (sovereign and government officers) to Rio de Janeiro brought large benefits
to Brazil. Indeed, the transfer of the court in effect signified achievement of
Brazilian independence. The Portuguese prince and future King Joao VI opened
Brazil's ports to the trade of friendly nations, permitted the rise of local industries,
and founded the Bank of Brazil. In 1815 he elevated Brazil to the legal status of a
kingdom coequal with Portugal. ln one sense, however, Brazil's new status
signified the substitution of one dependence for another. Freed from Portuguese
control, Brazil came under the economic dominance of England, which obtained
[500]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
major tariff concessions and other privileges by the Strangford Treaty of 1810
between Portugal and Great Britain. The treaty provided for the importation of
British manufactures into Brazil and the export of Brazilian agricultural produce to
Great Britain. One result was an influx of cheap machine-made goods that
swamped the handicrafts industry of the country.
Brazilian elites took satisfaction in Brazil's new role and the growth of educational,
cultural, and economic opportunities for their class. But the feeling was mixed with
resentment toward the thousands of Portuguese courtiers (officials) and hangers-on
who came with the court and who competed with Brazilians for jobs and favors.
Thus, the change in the status of Brazil sharpened the conflict between Portuguese
elites born in Brazil and elites born in Portugal and loyal to the Portuguese crown.
The event that precipitated the break with the mother country was the revolution of
1820 in Portugal. The Portuguese revolutionaries framed a liberal constitution for
the kingdom, but they were conservative or reactionary in relation to Brazil. They
demanded the immediate return of King Joao to Lisbon, an end to the system of
dual monarchy that he had devised, and the restoration of the Portuguese
commercial monopoly. Timid and vacillating, King Joao did not know which way
to turn. Under the pressure of his courtiers, who hungered to return to Portugal and
their lost estates, he finally approved the new constitution and sailed for Portugal.
He left behind him, however, his son and heir, Pedro, and in a private letter advised
him that in the event the Brazilians should demand independence, he should
assume leadership of the movement and set the crown of Brazil on his head.
Soon it became clear that the Portuguese parliament intended to set the clock back
by abrogating all the liberties and concessions won by Brazil since 1808. One of its
decrees insisted on the immediate return of Pedro from Brazil. The pace of events
moved more rapidly in 1822. On January 9, urged on by Brazilian advisers who
[501]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
perceived a golden opportunity to make an orderly transition to independence
without the intervention of the masses, Pedro refused an order from the parliament
to return to Portugal, saying famously, "l remain." On September 7, regarded by all
Brazilians as Independence Day, he issued the even more celebrated proclamation,
"Independence or death!" In December 1822, having overcome slight resistance by
Portuguese troops, Dom Pedro was formally proclaimed constitutional Emperor of
Brazil.
[502]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Star Death
Until the early- to mid-twentieth century, scientists believed that stars generate
energy by shrinking. As stars contracted, it was thought, they would get hotter and
hotter, giving off light in the process. This could not be the primary way that stars
shine, however. If it were, they would scarcely last a million years, rather than the
billions of years in age that we know they are. We now know that stars are fueled
by nuclear fusion. Each time fusion takes place, energy is released as a by-product.
This energy, expelled into space, is what we see as starlight. The fusion process
begins when two hydrogen nuclei smash together to form a particle called the
deuteron (a combination of a positive proton and a neutral neutron).
Deuterons readily combine with additional protons to form helium. Helium, in
turn, can fuse together to form heavier elements, such as carbon. In a typical star,
merger after merger takes place until significant quantities of heavy elements are
built up.
We must distinguish, at this point, between two different stellar types: Population I
and Population ll, the latter being much older than the former. These groups can
also be distinguished by their locations. Our galaxy, the Milky Way, is shaped like
a flat disk surrounding a central bulge. Whereas Population I stars are found
mainly in the galactic disk, Population II stars mostly reside in the central bulge of
the galaxy and in the halo surrounding this bulge.
Population II stars date to the early stages of the universe. Formed when the
cosmos was filled with hydrogen and helium gases, they initially
contained virtually no heavy elements. They shine until their fusible material
is exhausted. When Population II stars die, their material is spread out into space.
Some of this dust is eventually incorporated into newly formed Population I stars.
[503]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Though Population I stars consist mostly of hydrogen and helium gas, they also
contain heavy elements (heavier than helium), which comprise about 1 or 2 percent
of their mass. These heavier materials are fused from the lighter elements that the
stars have collected. Thus, Population I stars contain material that once belonged to
stars from previous generations. The Sun is a good example of a Population I star.
What will happen when the Sun dies? In several billion years, our mother star will
burn much brighter. It will expend more and more of its nuclear fuel, until little is
left of its original hydrogen. Then, at some point in the far future, all nuclear
reactions in the Sun’s center will cease.
Once the Sun passes into its "postnuclear" phase, it will separate effectively into
two different regions: an inner zone and an outer zone. While no more hydrogen
fuel will remain in the inner zone, there will be a small amount left in the outer
zone. Rapidly, changes will begin to take place that will serve to tear the Sun apart.
The inner zone, its nuclear fires no longer burning, will begin to collapse under the
influence of its own weight and will contract into a tiny hot core, dense and dim.
An opposite fate will await the outer region, a loosely held-together ball of gas. A
shock wave caused by the inner zone's contraction will send ripples through the
dying star, pushing the stellar exterior's material farther and farther outward. The
outer envelope will then grow rapidly, increasing, in a short interval, hundreds of
times in size. As it expands, it will cool down by thousands of degrees. Eventually,
the Sun will become a red giant star, cool and bright. It will be so large that it will
occupy the whole space that used to be the Earth's orbit and so brilliant that it
would be able to be seen with the naked eye thousands of light-years away. It will
exist that way for millions of years, gradually releasing the material of its outer
envelope into space. Finally, nothing will be left of the gaseous exterior of the Sun;
all that will remain will be the hot, white core. The Sun will have become a white
[504]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
dwarf star. The core will shrink, giving off the last of its energy, and the Sun will
finally die.