31-40
Speciation in Geographically Isolated
Populations
Evolutionary biologists believe that speciation, the formation of a new species,
often begins when some kind of physical barrier arises and divides a population of
a single species into separate subpopulations. Physical separation between
subpopulations promotes the formation of new species because once the members
of one subpopulation can no longer mate with members of another subpopulation,
they cannot exchange variant genes that arise in one of the subpopulations. In the
absence of gene flow between the subpopulations, genetic differences between the
groups begin to accumulate. Eventually the subpopulations become so genetically
distinct that they cannot interbreed even if the physical barriers between them were
removed. At this point the subpopulations have evolved into distinct species. This
route to speciation is known as allopatry (“allo-” means “different”, and “patria”
means “homeland”).
Allopatric speciation may be the main speciation route. This should not be
surprising, since allopatry is pretty common. In general, subpopulations of most
species are separated from each other by some measurable distance. So even under
normal situations the gene flow among the subpopulations is more of an
intermittent trickle than a steady stream. In addition, barriers can rapidly arise and
shut off the trickle. For example, in the 1800s a monstrous earthquake changed the
course of the Mississippi River, a large river flowing in the central part of the
United States of America. The change separated populations of insects now living
along opposite shores, completely cutting off gene flow between them.
[311]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Geographic isolation can also proceed slowly, over great spans of time. We find
evidence of such extended events in the fossil record, which affords glimpse into
the breakup of formerly continuous environments. For example, during past ice
ages, glaciers advanced down through North America and Europe and gradually
cut off parts of populations from one another. When the glaciers retreated, the
separated populations of plants and animals came into contact again. Some groups
that had descended from the same parent population were no longer reproductively
compatible – they had evolved into separate species. In other groups, however,
genetic divergences had not proceeded so far, and the descendants could still
interbreed – for them, reproductive isolation was not completed, and so speciation
had not occurred.
Allopatric speciation can also be brought by the imperceptibly slow
but colossal movements of the tectonic plates that make up Earth’s surface. About
5 million years ago such geologic movements created the land bridge between
North America and South America that we call the Isthmus of Panama . While
previously the gap between the continents had allowed a free flow of water, now
the isthmus presented a barrier that divided the Atlantic Ocean from the Pacific
Ocean. This division set the stage for allopatric speciation among populations of
fishes and other marine species.
In the 1980s, John Graves studied two populations of closely related fishes, one
population from the Atlantic side of isthmus, the other from the Pacific side. He
compared four enzymes found in the muscles of each population. Graves found
that all four Pacific enzymes function better at lower temperatures than the four
Atlantic versions of the same enzymes. This is significant because Pacific seawater
is typically 2 to 3 degrees cooler than seawater on the Atlantic side of isthmus.
Analysis by gel electrophoresis revealed slight differences in amino acid sequence
[312]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
of the enzymes of two of the four pairs. This is significant because the amino
acid sequence of an enzyme is determined by genes.
Graves drew two conclusions from these observations. First, at least some of the
observed differences between the enzymes of the Atlantic and Pacific fish
populations were not random but were the result of evolutionary adaptation.
Second, it appears that closely related populations of fishes on both sides of the
isthmus are starting to genetically diverge from each other. Because Graves’ study
of geographically isolated populations of isthmus fishes offers a glimpse of the
beginning of a process of gradual accumulation of mutations that are neutral or
adaptive, divergences here might be evidence of allopatric speciation in process.
www.ZabanExam.com
[313]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Early Childhood Education
Preschools – educational programs for children under the age of five – differ
significantly from one country to another according to the views that different
societies hold regarding the purpose of early childhood education. For instance, in
a cross-country comparison of preschools in China, Japan, and the United States,
researchers found that parents in the three countries view the purpose of preschools
very differently. Whereas parents in China tend to see preschools primarily as a
way of giving children a good start academically, Japanese parents view them
primarily as a way of giving children the opportunity to be members of a group. In
the United States, in comparison, parents regard the primary purpose of preschools
as making children more independent and self-reliant, although obtaining a good
academic start and having group experience are also important.
While many programs designed for preschoolers focus primarily on social and
emotional factors, some are geared mainly toward promoting cognitive gains and
preparing preschoolers for the formal instruction they will experience when they
start kindergarten. In the United States, the best-known program designed to
promote future academic success is Head Start. Established in the 1960s when the
United States declared the War on Poverty, the program has served over 13 million
children and their families. The program, which stresses parental involvement, was
designed to serve the “whole child”, including children’s physical health, self-
confidence, social responsibility, and social and emotional development.
Whether Head Start is seen as successful or not depends on the lens through which
one is looking. If, for instance, the program is expected to provide long-term
increases in IQ (intelligence quotient) scores, it is a disappointment. Although
graduates of Head Start programs tend to show immediate IQ gains, these increases
[314]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
do not last. On the other hand, it is clear that Head Start is meeting its goal of
getting preschoolers ready for school. Preschoolers who participate in Head Start
are better prepared for future schooling than those who do not. Furthermore,
graduates of Head Start programs have better future school grade. Finally, some
research suggests that ultimately Head Start graduates show higher academic
performance at the end of high school, although the gains are modest.
In addition, results from other types of readiness programs indicate that those who
participate and graduate are less likely to repeat grades, and they are more likely to
complete school than readiness program, for every dollar spent on the program,
taxpayers saved seven dollars by the time the graduates reached the age of 27.
The most recent comprehensive evaluation of early intervention programs suggests
that, taken as a group, preschool programs can provide significant benefits, and
that government funds invested early in life may ultimately lead to a reduction in
future costs. For instance, compared with children who did not participate in early
intervention programs, participants in various programs showed gains in emotional
or cognitive development, better educational outcomes, increased economic self-
sufficiency, reduced levels of criminal activity, and improved health-related
behaviors. Of course, not every program produced all these benefits, and not every
child benefited to the same extent. Furthermore, some researchers argue that less-
expensive programs are just as good as relatively expensive ones, such as Head
Start. Still, the results of the evaluation were promising, suggesting that the
potential benefits of early intervention can be substantial.
Not everyone agrees that programs that seek to enhance academic skills during the
preschool years are a good thing.In fact, according to developmental psychologist
David Elkind, United States society tends to push children so rapidly that they
begin to feel stress and pressure at a young age.Elkind argues that academic
[315]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
success is largely dependent upon factors out of parents’ control, such as inherited
abilities and a child’s rate of maturation.Consequently, children of a particular age
cannot be expected to master educational material without taking into account their
current level of cognitive development. In short, children require development
appropriate educational practice, which is education that is based on both typical
development and the unique characteristics of a given child.
[316]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Savanna Formation
Located in tropical areas at low altitudes, savannas are stable ecosystems, some
wet and some dry consisting of vast grasslands with scattered trees and shrubs.
They occur on a wide range of soil types and in extremes of climate. There is no
simple or single factor that determines if a given site will be a savanna, but some
factors seem to play important roles in their formation.
Savannas typically experience a rather prolonged dry season. One theory behind
savanna formation is that wet forest species are unable to withstand the dry season,
and thus savanna, rather than rain forest, is favored on the site. Savannas
experience an annual rainfall of between 1,000 and 2,000 millimeters, most of it
falling in a five- to eight-month wet season. Though plenty of rain may fall on a
savanna during the year, for at least part of the year little does, creating the drought
stress ultimately favoring grasses. Such conditions prevail throughout much of
northern South America and Cuba, but many Central American savannas as well as
coastal areas of Brazil and the island of Trinidad do not fit this pattern. In these
areas, rainfall per month exceeds that in the above definition, so other factors must
contribute to savanna formation.
In many characteristics, savanna soils are similar to those of some rain forests,
though more extreme. For example, savanna soils, like many rain forest soils, are
typically oxisols (dominated by certain oxide minerals) and ultisols (soils
containing no calcium carbonate), with a high acidity and notably low
concentrations of such minerals as phosphorus, calcium, magnesium, and
potassium, while aluminum levels are high. Some savannas occur on wet,
waterlogged soils; others on dry, sandy, well-drained soils. This may seem
contradictory, but it only means that extreme soil conditions, either too wet or too
[317]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
dry for forests, are satisfactory for savannas. More moderate conditions support
moist forests.
Waterlogged soils occur in areas that are flat or have poor drainage. These soils
usually contain large amounts of clay and easily become water saturated. Air
cannot penetrate between the soil particles, making the soil oxygen-poor. By
contrast, dry soils are sandy and porous, their coarse textures permitting water to
drain rapidly. Sandy soils are prone to the leaching of nutrients and minerals and so
tend to be nutritionally poor. Though most savannas are found on sites with poor
soils (because of either moisture conditions or nutrient levels of both), poor soils
can and do support lush rain forest
Most savannas probably experience mild fires frequently and major burns every
two years or so. Many savanna and dry-forest plant species are called pyrophytes,
meaning they are adapted in various ways to withstand occasional
burning. Frequent fire is a factor to which rain forest species seem unable to adapt,
although ancient charcoal remains from Amazon forest soils dating prior to the
arrival of humans suggest that moist forests also occasionally burn. Experiments
suggest that if fire did not occur in savannas in the Americas, species composition
would change significantly. When burning occurs, it prevents competition among
plant species from progressing to the point where some species exclude others,
reducing the overall diversity of the ecosystem. But in experimental areas
protected from fire, a few perennial grass species eventually come to dominate,
outcompeting all others.Evidence from other studies suggests that exclusion of fire
results in markedlydecreased plant-species richness, often with an increase in tree
density.There is generally little doubt that fire is a significant factor in maintaining
savanna, certainly in most regions.
[318]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
On certain sites, particularly in South America, savanna formation seems related to
frequent cutting and burning of moist forests for pastureland. Increase in
pastureland and subsequent overgrazing have resulted in an expansion of savanna.
The thin upper layer of humus (decayed organic matter) is destroyed by cutting and
burning. Humus is necessary for rapid decomposition of leaves by bacteria and
fungi and for recycling by surface roots. Once the humus layer disappears,
nutrients cannot be recycled and leach from the soil, converting soil from fertile to
infertile and making it suitable only for savanna vegetation. Forests on white,
sandy soil are most susceptible to permanent alteration.
[319]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 32
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[320]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Plant Colonization
Colonization is one way in which plants can change the ecology of a site.
Colonization is a process with two components: invasion and survival. The rate at
which a site is colonized by plants depends on both the rate at which individual
organisms (seeds, spores, immature or mature individuals) arrive at the site and
their success at becoming established and surviving. Success in colonization
depends to a great extent on there being a site available for colonization – a safe
site where disturbance by fire or by cutting down of trees has either removed
competing species or reduced levels of competition and other negative interactions
to a level at which the invading species can become established. For a given rate of
invasion, colonization of a moist, fertile site is likely to be much more rapid than
that of a dry, infertile site because of poor survival on the latter. A fertile, plowed
field is rapidly invaded by a large variety of weeds, whereas a neighboring
construction site from which the soil has been compacted or removed to expose a
coarse, infertile parent material may remain virtually free of vegetation for many
months or even years despite receiving the same input of seeds as the plowed field.
Both the rate of invasion and the rate of extinction vary greatly among different
plant species. Pioneer species - those that occur only in the earliest stages of
colonization - tend to have high rates of invasion because they produce very large
numbers of reproductive propagules (seeds, spores, and so on) and because they
have an efficient means of dispersal (normally, wind).
If colonizers produce short-lived reproductive propagules, they must produce very
large numbers unless they have an efficient means of dispersal to suitable new
habitats. Many plants depend on wind for dispersal and produce abundant
quantities of small, relatively short-lived seeds to compensate for the fact that wind
[321]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
is not always a reliable means If reaching the appropriate type of habitat.
Alternative strategies have evolved in some plants, such as those that produce
fewer but larger seeds that are dispersed to suitable sites by birds or small
mammals or those that produce long-lived seeds. Many forest plants seem to
exhibit the latter adaptation, and viable seeds of pioneer species can be found in
large numbers on some forest floors. For example, as many as 1,125 viable seeds
per square meter were found in a 100-year-old Douglas fir/western hemlock forest
in coastal British Columbia. Nearly all the seeds that had germinated from this
seed bank were from pioneer species. The rapid colonization of such sites after
disturbance is undoubtedly in part a reflection of the large seed band on the forest
floor.
An adaptation that is well developed in colonizing species is a high degree of
variation in germination (the beginning of a seed’s growth). Seeds of a given
species exhibit a wide range of germination dates, increasing the probability that at
least some of the seeds will germinate during a period of favorable environmental
conditions. This is particularly important for species that colonize an environment
where there is no existing vegetation to ameliorate climatic extremes and in which
there may be great climatic diversity.
Species succession in plant communities, i.e., the temporal sequence of appearance
and disappearance of species is dependent on events occurring at different stages in
the life history of a species. Variation in rates of invasion and growth plays an
important role in determining patterns of succession, especially secondary
succession. The species that are first to colonize a site are those that
produce abundant seed that is distributed successfully to new sites.Such species
generally grow rapidly and quickly dominate new sites, excluding other species
with lower invasion and growth rates. The first community that occupies a
[322]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
disturbed area therefore may be composed of specie with the highest rate of
invasion, whereas the community of the subsequent stage may consist of plants
with similar survival rates but lower invasion rates.
www.ZabanExam.com
[323]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Siam, 1851 – 1910
In the late nineteenth century, political and social changes were occurring rapidly
in Siam (now Thailand). The old ruling families were being displaced by an
evolving centralized government. These families were pensioned off (given a sum
of money to live on) or simply had their revenues taken away or restricted; their
sons were enticed away to schools for district officers, later to be posted in some
faraway province; and the old patron-client relations that had bound together local
societies simply disintegrated. Local rulers could no longer protect their relatives
and attendants in legal cases, and with the ending in 1905 of the practice of forcing
peasant farmers to work part-time for local rulers, the rulers no longer had a
regular base for relations with rural populations. The old local ruling families, then,
were severed from their traditional social context.
The same situation viewed from the perspective of the rural population is even
more complex. According to the government’s first census of the rural population,
taken in 1905, there were about thirty thousand villages in Siam. This was
probably a large increase over the figure even two or three decades earlier, during
the late 1800s. It is difficult to imagine it now, but Siam’s Central Plain in the late
1800s was nowhere near as densely settled as it is today. There were still forests
closely surrounding Bangkok into the last of the nineteenth century, and even at
century’s end there were wild elephants and tigers roaming the countryside only
twenty or thirty miles away.
Much population movement involved the opening up of new lands for rice
cultivation. Two things made this possible and encouraged it to happen. First, the
opening of the kingdom to the full force of international trade by the Boring Treaty
(1855) rapidly encouraged economic specialization in the growing of rice, mainly
[324]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
to feed the rice-deficient portions of Asia (India and china in particular). The
average annual volume of rice exported from Siam grew from under 60 million
kilograms per year in the late 1850s to more than 660 million kilograms per year at
the turn of the century; and over the same period the average price per kilogram
doubled. During the same period, the area planted in rice increased from about
230,000 acres to more than350, 000 acres. This growth was achieved as the result
of the collective decisions of thousands of peasants families to expand the amount
of land they cultivated, clear and plant new land, or adopt more intensive methods
of agriculture.
They were able to do so because of our second consideration.They were relatively
freer than they had been half a century earlier.Over the course of the Fifth Reign
(1868 – 1910), the ties that bound rural people to the aristocracy and local ruling
elites were greatly reduced. Peasants now paid a tax on individuals instead of being
required to render labor service to the government.Under these conditions, it made
good sense to thousands of peasant families to in effect work full-time at what they
had been able to do only part-time previously because of the requirement to work
for the government: grow rice for the marketplace.
Numerous changes accompanied these developments. The rural population
both dispersed and grew, and was probably less homogeneous and more mobile
than it had been a generation earlier. The villages became more vulnerable to
arbitrary treatment by government bureaucrats as local elites now had less control
over them. By the early twentieth century, as government modernization in a sense
caught up with what had been happening in the countryside since the 1870s, the
government bureaucracy intruded more and more into village life. Provincial
police began to appear, along with district officers and cattle registration and land
deeds and registration for compulsory military service. Village handicrafts
[325]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
diminished or died out completely as people bought imported consumer goods, like
cloth and tools, instead of making them themselves. More economic variation took
shape in rural villages, as some grew prosperous from farming while others did
not. As well as can be measured, rural standards of living improved in the Fifth
Reign. But the statistical averages mean little when measured against the harsh
realities of peasant life.
[326]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Distributions of Tropical Bee Colonies
In 1977 ecologists Stephen Hubbell and Leslie Johnson recorded a dramatic
example of how social interactions can produce and enforce regular spacing in a
population. They studied competition and nest spacing in populations of stingless
bees in tropical dry forests in Costa Rica. Though these bees do no
sting, rival colonies of some species fight fiercely over potential nesting sites.
Stingless bees are abundant in tropical and subtropical environments, where they
gather nectar and pollen from a wide variety of flowers. They generally nest in
trees and live in colonies made up of hundreds to thousands of workers. Hubbell
and Johnson observed that some species of stingless bees are highly aggressive to
members of their species from other colonies, while other species are not.
Aggressive species usually forage in groups and feed mainly on flowers that occur
in high-density clumps. Nonaggressive species feed singly or in small groups and
on more widely distributed flowers.
Hubbell and Johnson studied several species of stingless bees to determine whether
there is a relationship between aggressiveness and patterns of colony distribution.
They predicted that the colonies of aggressive species would show regular
distributions, while those of nonaggressive species would show random or closely
grouped (clumped) distribution. They concentrated their studies on a thirteen-
hectare tract of tropical dry forest that contained numerous nests of nine species of
stingless bees.
Though Hubbell and Johnson were interested in how bee behavior might affect
colony distributions, they recognized that the availability of potential nest sites for
colonies could also affect distributions. So as one of the first steps in their study,
they mapped the distributions of trees suitable for nesting. They found that
[327]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
potential nest trees were distributed randomly through the study area. They also
found that the number of potential nest sites was much greater than the number of
bee colonies.What did these measurements show the researchers? The number of
colonies in the study area was not limited by availability of suitable trees, and a
clumped or regular distribution of colonies was not due to an underlying clumped
or regular distribution of potential nest sites.
Hubbell and Johnson mapped the nests of five of the nine species of stingless bees
accurately, and the nests of four of these species were distributed regularly. All
four species with regular nest distributions were highly aggressive to bees from
other colonies of their own species. The fifth species was not aggressive, and its
nests were randomly distributed over the study area.
The researchers also studied the process by which the aggressive species establish
new colonies. Their observations provide insights intothe mechanisms that
establish and maintain the regular nest distribution of these species. Aggressive
species apparently mark prospective nest sites with pheromones, chemical
substances secreted by some animals for communication with other members of
their species. The pheromone secreted by these stingless bees attracts and
aggregates members of their colony to the prospective nest site; however, it also
attracts workers from other nests.
If workers from two different colonies arrive at the prospective nest at the same
time, they may fight for possession. Fights may be escalated into protracted battles.
The researchers observed battles over a nest tree that lasted for two weeks. Each
dawn, fifteen to thirty workers from two competing colonies arrived at the
contested nest site. The workers from the two colonies faced off in two swarms and
displayed and fought with each other. In the displays, pairs of bees faced each
other, slowly flew vertically to a height of about three meters, and then grappled
[328]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
each other to the ground. When the two bees hit the ground, they separated, faced
off, and performed another aerial display. Bees did not appear to be injured in
these fights, which were apparently ritualized. The two swarms abandoned the
battle at about 8 or 9 A.M. each morning, only to re-form and begin again the next
day just after dawn. While this contest over an unoccupied nest site produced no
obvious mortality, fights over occupied nests sometimes kill over 1,000 bees in a
single battle.
[329]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 33
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[330]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The First Civilizations
Evidence suggests that an important stimulus behind the rise of early civilizations
was the development of settled agriculture, which unleashed a series of changes in
the organization of human communities that culminated in the rise of large ancient
empires.
The exact time and place that crops were first cultivated successfully is uncertain.
Many prehistorians believe that farming may have emerged in dependently in
several different areas of the world when small communities, driven by increasing
population and a decline in available food resources, began to plant seeds in the
ground in an effort to guarantee their survival. The first farmers, who may have
lived as long as 10,000 years ago, undoubtedly used simple techniques and still
relied primarily on other forms of food production, such as hunting, foraging, or
pastoralism. The real breakthrough took place when farmers began to cultivate
crops along the floodplains of river systems. The advantage was that crops grown
in such areas were not as dependent on rainfall and therefore produced a more
reliable harvest. An additional benefit was that the sediment carried by the river
waters deposited nutrients in the soil, thus enabling the farmer to cultivate a single
plot of ground for many years without moving to a new location. Thus, the first
truly sedentary (that is, nonmigratory) societies were born. As time went on, such
communities gradually learned how to direct the flow of water to enhance the
productive capacity of the land, while the introduction of the iron plow eventually
led to the cultivation of heavy soils not previously susceptible to agriculture.
The spread of this river valley agriculture in various parts of Asia and Africa was
the decisive factor in the rise of the first civilizations. The increase in food
production in these regions led to a significant growth in population, while efforts
[331]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
to control the flow of water to maximize the irrigation of cultivated areas and to
protect the local inhabitants from hostile forces outside the
community provoked the first steps toward cooperative activities on a large scale.
The need to oversee the entire process brought about the emergence of an elite that
was eventually transformed into a government.
The first clear steps in the rise of the first civilizations took place in the fourth and
third millennia B.C. in Mesopotamia, northern Africa, India, and China. How the
first governments took shape in these areas is not certain, but anthropologists
studying the evolution of human communities in various parts of the world have
discovered that one common stage in the process is the emergence of what are
called “big men” within a single village or a collection of villages. By means of
their military prowess, dominant personalities, or political talents, these people
gradually emerge as the leaders of that community. In time, the “big men” become
formal symbols of authority and pass on that authority to others within their own
family. As the communities continue to grow in size and material wealth, the “big
men” assume hereditary status, and their allies and family members are
transformed into a hereditary monarchy.
The appearance of these sedentary societies had a major impact on the social
organizations, religious beliefs, and way of life of the peoples living within their
boundaries. With the increase in population and the development of centralized
authority came the emergence of the cities.While some of these urban centers were
identified with a particular economic function, such as proximity to gold or iron
deposits or a strategic location on a major trade route, others served primarily as
administrative centers or the site of temples for the official cult or other ritual
observances.Within these cities, new forms of livelihood appeared to satisfy the
growing need for social services and consumer goods.Some people became
[332]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
artisans or merchants, while others became warriors, scholars, or priests. In some
cases, the physical division within the first cities reflected the strict hierarchical
character of the society as a whole, with a royal palace surrounded by an imposing
wall and separate from the remainder of the urban population. In other instances,
such as the Indus River Valley, the cities lacked a royal precinct and the
ostentatious palaces that marked their contemporaries elsewhere.
www.ZabanExam.com
[333]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Railroads and Commercial Agriculture in
Nineteenth-Century United States
By 1850 the United States possessed roughly 9,000 miles of railroad track; ten
years later it had over 30,000 miles, more than the rest of the world combined.
Much of the new construction during the 1850s occurred west of the Appalachian
Mountains – over 2,000 miles in the states of Ohio and Illinois alone.
The effect of the new railroad lines rippled outward through the economy. Farmers
along the tracks began to specialize in crops that they could market in distant
locations. With their profits they purchased manufactured goods that earlier they
might have made at home. Before the railroad reached Tennessee, the state
produced about 25,000 bushels (or 640 tons) of wheat, which sold for less than 50
cents a bushel. Once the railroad came, farmers in the same counties grew 400,000
bushels (over 10,000 tons) and sold their crop at a dollar a bushel.
The new railroad networks shifted the direction of western trade. In 1840 most
northwestern grain was shipped south down the Mississippi River to
the bustling port of New Orleans. But low water made steamboat travel hazardous
in summer, and ice shut down traffic in winter.Products such as lard, tallow, and
cheese quickly spoiled if stored in New Orleans’ hot and humid
warehouses. Increasingly, traffic from the Midwest flowed west to east, over the
new rail lines. Chicago became the region’s hub, linking the farms of the upper
Midwest to New York and other eastern cities by more than 2,000 miles of track in
1855. Thus while the value of goods shipped by river to New Orleans continued to
increase, the South’s overall share of western trade dropped dramatically.
[334]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
A sharp rise in demand for grain abroad also encouraged farmers in the Northeast
and Midwest to become more commercially oriented. Wheat, which in 1845
commanded $1.08 a bushel in New York City, fetched $2.46 in 1855; in similar
fashion the price of corn nearly doubled. Farmers responded by specializing in
cash crops, borrowing to purchase more land, and investing in equipment to
increase productivity.
As railroad lines fanned out from Chicago, farmers began to acquire open prairie
land in Illinois and then Iowa, putting the fertile, deep black soil into production.
Commercial agriculture transformed this remarkable treeless environment. To
settlers accustomed to eastern woodlands, the thousands of square miles of tall
grass were an awesome sight. Indian grass, Canada wild rye, and native big
bluestem all grew higher than a person. Because eastern plows could not penetrate
the densely tangled roots of prairie grass, the earliest settlers erected farms along
the boundary separating the forest from the prairie. In 1837, however, John Deere
patented a sharp-cutting steel plow that sliced through the sod without soil sticking
to the blade. Cyrus McCormick refined a mechanical reaper that harvested fourteen
times more wheat with the same amount of labor. By the 1850s McCormick was
selling 1,000 reapers a year and could not keep up with demand, while Deere
turned out 10,000 plows annually.
The new commercial farming fundamentally altered the Midwestern landscape and
the environment. Native Americans had grown corn in the region for years, but
never in such large fields as did later settlers who became farmers,
whose surpluses were shipped east. Prairie farmers also introduced new crops that
were not part of the earlier ecological system, notably wheat, along with fruits and
vegetables. Native grasses were replaced by a small number of plants cultivated as
commodities. Corn had the best yields, but it was primarily used to feed livestock.
[335]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Because bread played a key role in the American and European diet, wheat became
the major cash crop. Tame grasses replaced native grasses in pastures for making
hay.
Western farmers altered the landscape by reducing the annual fires that had kept
the prairie free from trees. In the absence of these fires, trees reappeared on land
not in cultivation and, if undisturbed, eventually formed woodlots. The earlier
unbroken landscape gave way to independent farms, each fenced off in a precise
checkerboard pattern. It was an artificial ecosystem of animals, woodlots, and
crops, whose large, uniform layout made western farms more efficient than the
more-irregular farms in the East.
[336]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Extinction Episodes of The Past
It was not until the Cambrian period, beginning about 600 million years ago, that a
great proliferation of macroscopic species occurred on Earth and produced a fossil
record that allows us to track the rise and fall of biodiversity. Since the Cambrian
period, biodiversity has generally risen, but there have been some notable
exceptions. Biodiversity collapsed dramatically during at least five periods because
of mass extinctions around the globe. The five major mass extinctions receive most
of the attention, but they are only one end of a spectrum of extinction events.
Collectively, more species went extinct during smaller events that were less
dramatic but more frequent. The best known of the five major extinction events,
the one that saw the demise of the dinosaurs, is the Cretaceous-Tertiary extinction.
Starting about 280 million years ago, reptiles were the dominant large animals in
terrestrial environments. In popular language this was the era “when
dinosaurs ruled Earth,” when a wide variety of reptile species occupying many
ecological niches. However, no group or species can maintain its dominance
indefinitely, and when, after over 200 million years, the age of dinosaurs came to a
dramatic end about 65 million years ago, mammals began to flourish, evolving
from relatively few types of small terrestrial animals into the myriad of diverse
species, including bats and whales, that we know today. Paleontologists label this
point in Earth’s history as the end of the Cretaceous period and the beginning of
the Tertiary period, often abbreviated as the K-T boundary. This time was also
marked by changes in many other types of organisms. Overall, about 38 percent of
the families of marine animals were lost, with percentages much higher in some
groups Ammonoid mollusks went from being very diverse and abundant to being
extinct. An extremely abundant set of planktonic marine animals called
[337]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
foraminifera largely disappeared, although they rebounded later. Among plants, the
K-T boundary saw a sharp but brief rise in the abundance of primitive vascular
plants such as ferns, club mosses, horsetails, and conifers and other gymnosperms.
The number of flowering plants (angiosperms) was reduced at this time, but they
then began to increase dramatically.
What caused these changes? For many years scientists assumed that a cooling of
the climate was responsible, with dinosaurs being particularly vulnerable because,
like modern reptiles, they were ectothermic (dependent on environmental heat, or
cold-blooded). It is now widely believed that at least some species of dinosaurs had
a metabolic rate high enough for them to be endotherms (animals that maintain a
relatively consistent body temperature by generating heat internally). Nevertheless,
climatic explanations for the K-T extinction are not really challenged by the ideas
that dinosaurs may have been endothermic, because even endotherms can be
affected by a significant change in the climate.
Explanations for the K-T extinction were revolutionized in 1980 when a group of
physical scientists led by Luis Alvarez proposed that 65 million years ago Earth
was stuck by a 10-kilometer-wide meteorite traveling at 90,000 kilometers per
hour. They believed that this impact generated a thick cloud of dust that enveloped
Earth, shutting out much of the incoming solar radiation and reducing plant
photosynthesis to very low levels. Short-term effects might have included huge
tidal waves and extensive fires. In other words, a series of events arising from a
single cataclysmic event caused the massive extinctions.Initially, the meteorite
theory was based on a single line of evidence. At locations around the globe,
geologists had found an unusually high concentration of iridium in the layer of
sedimentary rocks that was formed about 65 million years ago.Iridium is an
element that is usually uncommon near Earth’s surface, but it is abundant in some
[338]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
meteorites.Therefore, Alvarez and his colleagues concluded that it was likely that
the iridium in sedimentary rocks deposited at the K-T boundary had originated in a
giant meteorite or asteroid. Most scientist came to accept the meteorite theory after
evidence came to light that a circular formation, 180 kilometers in diameter and
centered on the north coast of the Yucatan Peninsula, was created by a meteorite
impact about 65 million years ago.
[339]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 34
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[340]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Islamic Art and The Book
The arts of the Islamic book, such as calligraphy and decorative drawing,
developed during A.D. 900 to 1500, and luxury books are some of the most
characteristic examples of Islamic art produced in this period. This came about
from two major developments: paper became common, replacing parchment as the
major medium for writing, and rounded scripts were regularized and perfected so
that they replaced the angular scripts of the previous period, which because of their
angularity were uneven in height. Books became major vehicles for artistic
expression, and the artists who produced them, notably calligraphers and painters,
enjoyed high status, and their workshops were often sponsored by princes and their
courts. Before A.D. 900, manuscripts of the Koran (the book containing the
teachings of the Islamic religion) seem to have been the most common type of
book produced and decorated, but after that date a wide range of books were
produced for a broad spectrum of patrons. These continued to include, of course,
manuscripts of the Koran, which every Muslim wanted to read, but scientific
works, histories, romances, and epic and lyric poetry were also copied in fine
handwriting and decorated with beautiful illustrations. Most were made for sale on
the open market, and cities boasted special souks (markets) where books were
bought and sold. The mosque of Marrakech in Morocco is known as the
Kutubiyya, or Booksellers’ Mosque, after the adjacent market. Some of the most
luxurious books were specific commissions made at the order of a particular prince
and signed by the calligrapher and decorator.
Papermaking had been introduced to the Islamic lands from China in the eighth
century.It has been said that Chinese papermakers were among the prisoners
captured in a battle fought near Samarqand between the Chinese and the Muslims
[341]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
in 751, and the technique of papermaking – in which cellulose pulp extracted
from any of several plants is first suspended in water, caught on a fine screen, and
then dried into flexible sheets – slowly spread westward.Within fifty years, the
government in Baghdad was using paper for documents. Writing in ink on paper,
unlike parchment, could not easily be erased, and therefore paper had the
advantage that it was difficult to alter what was written on it.Papermaking spread
quickly to Egypt – and eventually to Sicily and Spain – but it was several centuries
before paper supplanted parchment for copies of the Koran, probably because of
the conservative nature of religious art and its practitioners. In western Islamic
lands, parchment continued to be used for manuscripts of the Koran throughout
this period.
The introduction of paper spurred a conceptual revolution whose consequences
have barely been explored. Although paper was never as cheap as it has become
today, it was far less expensive than parchment, and therefore more people could
afford to buy books, Paper is thinner than parchment, so more pages could be
enclosed within a single volume. At first, paper was made in relatively small sheets
that were pasted together, but by the beginning of the fourteenth century, very
large sheets – as much as a meter across – were available. These large sheets meant
that calligraphers and artists had more space on which to work. Paintings became
more complicated, giving the artist greater opportunities to depict space or
emotion. The increased availability of paper, particularly after 1250, encouraged
people to develop systems of representation, such as architectural plans and
drawings. This in turn allowed the easy transfer of artistic ideas and motifs over
great distances from one medium to another, and in a different scale in ways that
had been difficult, if not impossible, in the previous period.
[342]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Rounded styles of Arabic handwriting had long been used for correspondence and
documents alongside the formal angular scripts used for inscriptions and
manuscripts of the Koran. Around the year 900, Ibn Muqla, who was a secretary
and vizier at the Abbasid court in Baghdad, developed a system of proportioned
writing. He standardized the length of alif, the first letter of the Arabic alphabet,
and then determined what the size and shape of all other letters should be, based on
the alif. Eventually, six round forms of handwriting, composed ofthree pairs of big
and little scripts known collectively as the Six Pens, became the standard repertory
of every calligrapher.
www.ZabanExam.com
[343]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The Development of Steam Power
By the eighteenth century, Britain was experiencing a severe shortage of
energy.Because of the growth of population, most of the great forests of medieval
Britain had long ago been replaced by fields of grain and hay.Wood was in ever-
shorter supply, yet it remained tremendously important.It served as the primary
source of heat for all homes and industries and as a basic raw material.Processed
wood (charcoal) was the fuel that was mixed with iron ore in the blast furnace to
produce pig iron (raw iron). The iron industry’s appetite for wood was enormous,
and by 1740 the British iron industry was stagnating. Vast forests enabled Russia
to become the world’s leading producer of iron, much of which was exported to
Britain. But Russia’s potential for growth was limited too, and in a few decades
Russia would reach the barrier of inadequate energy that was already holding
England back.
As this early energy crisis grew worse, Britain looked toward its abundant and
widely scattered reserves of coal as an alternative to its vanishing wood. Coal was
first used in Britain in the late Middle Ages as a source of heat. By 1640 most
homes in London were heated with it, and it also provided heat for making beer,
glass, soap, and other products. Coal was not used, however, to produce
mechanical energy or to power machinery. It was there that coal’s potential wad
enormous.
As more coal was produced, mines were dug deeper and deeper and were
constantly filling with water. Mechanical pumps, usually powered by hundreds of
horses waling in circles at the surface, had to be installed. Such power was
expensive and bothersome. In an attempt to overcome these disadvantages,
Thomas Savery in 1698 and Thomas Newcomen in 1705 invented the first
[344]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
primitive steam engines. Both engines were extremely inefficient. Both burned
coal to produce steam, which was then used to operate a pump. However, by the
early 1770s, many of the Savery engines and hundreds of the Newcomen engines
were operating successfully, though inefficiently, in English and Scottish mines.
In the early 1760s, a gifted young Scot named James Watt was drawn to a critical
study of the steam engine. Watt was employed at the time by the University of
Glasgow as a skilled crafts worker making scientific instruments. In 1763, Watt
was called on to repair a Newcomen engine being used in a physics course. After a
series of observations, Watt saw that the Newcomen’s waste of energy could be
reduced by adding a separate condenser. This splendid invention, patented in 1769,
greatly increased the efficiency of the steam engine. The steam engine of Watt and
his followers was the technological advance that gave people, at least for a while,
unlimited power and allowed the invention and use of all kinds of power
equipment.
The steam engine was quickly put to use in several industries in Britain. It drained
mines and made possible the production of ever more coal to feed steam engines
elsewhere. The steam power plant began to replace waterpower in the cotton-
spinning mills as well as other industries during the 1780s, contributing to a
phenomenal rise in industrialization. The British iron industry was radically
transformed. The use of powerful, steam-driven bellows in blast furnaces helped
iron makers switch over rapidly from limited charcoal to unlimited coke (which is
made from coal) in the smelting of pig iron (the process of refining impure iron)
after 1770. In the 1780s, Henry Cort developed the puddling furnace, which
allowed pig iron to be refined in turn with coke. Cort also developed heavy-duty,
steam-powered rolling mills, which were capable of producing finished iron in
every shape and form.
[345]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The economic consequence of these technical innovations in steam power was a
great boom in the British iron industry. In 1740 annual British iron production was
only 17,000 tons, but by 1844, with the spread of coke smelting and the impact of
Cort’s inventions, it had increased to 3,000,000 tons. This was a truly amazing
expansion. Once scarce and expensive, iron became cheap, basic,
and indispensable to the economy.
[346]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Protection Of Plants By Insects
Many plants – one or more species of at least 68 different families – can secrete
nectar even when they have no blossoms, because they bear extrafloral nectaries
(structures that produce nectar) on stems, leaves, leaf stems, or other structures.
These plants usually occur where ants are abundant, most in the tropics but some in
temperate areas. Among those of northeastern North America are various plums,
cherries, roses, hawthorns, poplars, and oaks. Like floral nectar, extrafloral nectar
consists mainly of water with a high content of dissolved sugars and, in some
plants, small amounts of amino acids. The extrafloral nectaries of some plants are
known to attract ants and other insects, but the evolutionary history of most plants
with these nectaries is unknown. Nevertheless, most ecologists believe that all
extrafloral nectaries attract insects that will defend the plant.
Ants are portably the most frequent and certainly the most persistentdefenders of
plants.Since the highly active worker ants require a great deal of energy, plants
exploit this need by providing extrafloral nectar that supplies ants with abundant
energy. To return this favor, ants guard the nectaries, driving away or killing
intruding insects that might compete with ants for nectar.Many of these intruders
are herbivorous and would eat the leaves of the plants.
Biologists once thought that secretion of extrafloral nectar has some purely internal
physiological function, and that ants provide no benefit whatsoever to the plants
that secrete it. This view and the opposing “protectionist” hypothesis that ants
defend plants had been disputed for over a hundred years when, in 1910,
a skeptical William Morton Wheeler commented on the controversy. He called for
proof of the protectionist view: that visitations of the ants confer protection on the
plants and that in the absence of the insects a much greater number would perish or
[347]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
fail to produce flowers or seeds than when the insects are present. That we now
have an abundance of the proof that was called for was established when Barbara
Bentley reviewed the relevant evidence in 1977, and since then many more
observations and experiments have provided still further proof that ants benefit
plants.
One example shows how ants attracted to extrafloral nectaries protect morning
glories against attacking insects. The principal insect enemies of the North
American morning glory feed mainly on its flowers or fruits rather than its leaves.
Grasshoppers feeding on flowers indirectly block pollination and the production of
seeds by destroying the corolla or the stigma, which receives the pollen grains and
on which the pollen germinates. Without their colorful corolla, flowers do not
attract pollinators and are not fertilized. An adult grasshopper can consume a large
corolla, about 2.5 inches long, in an hour. Caterpillars and seed beetles affect seed
production directly. Caterpillars devour the ovaries, where the seeds are produced,
and seed beetle larvae eat seeds as they burrow in developing fruits.
Extrafloral nectaries at the base of each sepal attract several kinds of insects, but 96
percent of them are ants, several different species of them. When buds are still
small, less than a quarter of an inch long, the sepal nectaries are already present
and producing nectar. They continue to do so as the flower develops and while the
fruit matures. Observations leave little doubt that ants protect morning glory
flowers and fruits from the combined enemy force of grasshoppers, caterpillars,
and seed beetles. Bentley compares the seed production of six plants that grew
where there were no ants with that of seventeen plants that were occupied by ants.
Unprotected plants bore only 45 seeds per plant, but plants occupied by ants bore
211 seeds per plant. Although ants are not big enough to kill or seriously injure
grasshoppers, they drive them away by nipping at their feet. Seed beetles are
[348]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
more vulnerable because they are much smaller than grasshoppers. The ants prey
on the adult beetles, disturb females as they lay their eggs on developing fruits, and
eat many of the eggs they do manage to lay.
[349]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 35
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[350]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Earth’s Age
One of the first recorded observers to surmise a long age for Earth was the Greek
historian Herodotus, who lived from approximately 480 B.C. to 425 B.C. He
observed that the Nile River Delta was in fact a series of sediment deposits built up
in successive floods. By noting that individual floods deposit only thin layers of
sediment, he was able to conclude that the Nile Delta had taken many thousands of
years to build up. More important than the amount of time Herodotus computed,
which turns out to be trivial compared with the age of Earth, was the notion that
one could estimate ages of geologic features by determining rates of the processes
responsible for such features, and then assuming the rates to be roughly constant
over time. Similar applications of this concept were to be used again and again in
later centuries to estimate the ages of rock formations and, in particular, of layers
of sediment that had compacted and cemented to form sedimentary rocks.
It was not until the seventeenth century that attempts were made again to
understand clues to Earth's history through the rock record. Nicolaus Steno (1638-
1686) was the first to work out principles of the progressive depositing of sediment
in Tuscany. However, James Hutton (1726-1797), known as the founder of modern
geology, was the first to have the important insight that geologic processes are
cyclic in nature. Forces associated with subterranean heat cause land to be uplifted
into plateaus and mountain ranges. The effects of wind and water then break down
the masses of uplifted rock, producing sediment that is transported by water
downward to ultimately form layers in lakes, seashores, or even oceans. Over time,
the layers become sedimentary rock. These rocks are then uplifted sometime in the
future to form new mountain ranges, which exhibit the sedimentary layers (and the
[351]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
remains of life within those layers) of the earlier episodes of erosion and
deposition.
Hutton's concept represented a remarkable insight because it unified many
individual phenomena and observations into a conceptual picture of Earth’s
history. With the further assumption that these geologic processes were generally
no more or less vigorous than they are today, Hutton's examination of sedimentary
layers led him to realize that Earth's history must be enormous, that geologic time
is an abyss and human history a speck by comparison.
After Hutton, geologists tried to determine rates of sedimentation so as to estimate
the age of Earth from the total length of the sedimentary or stratigraphic record.
Typical numbers produced at the turn of the twentieth century were 100 million to
400 million years. These underestimated the actual age by factors of 10 to 50
because much of the sedimentary record is missing in various locations and
because there is a long rock sequence that is older than half a billion years that is
far less well defined in terms of fossils and less well preserved.
Various other techniques to estimate Earth's age fell short, and particularly
noteworthy in this regard were flawed determinations of the Sun's age. It had been
recognized by the German philosopher Immanuel Kant (1724-1804) that chemical
reactions could not supply the tremendous amount of energy flowing from the Sun
for more than about a millennium. Two physicists during the nineteenth century
both came up with ages for the Sun based on the Sun's energy coming
from gravitational contraction. Under the force of gravity, the compression
resulting from a collapse of the object must release energy. Ages for Earth were
derived that were in the tens of millions of years, much less than the geologic
estimates of the lime.
[352]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
It was the discovery of radioactivity at the end of the nineteenth century that
opened the door to determining both the Sun’s energy source and the age of Earth.
From the initial work came a suite of discoveries leading to radio isotopic dating,
which quickly ted to the realization that Earth must be billions of years old, and to
the discovery of nuclear fusion as an energy source capable of sustaining the Sun's
luminosity for that amount of time. By the 1960s, both analysis of meteorites and
refinements of solar evolution models converged on an age for the solar system,
and hence for Earth, of 4 5 billion years.
www.ZabanExam.com
[353]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The Development of Social Complexity
For most of human history, we have foraged (hunted, fished, and collected wild
plants) for food. Small nomadic groups could easily supply the necessities for their
families. No one needed more, and providing for more than one’s needs made little
sense. The organization of such societies could be rather simple, revolving around
age and gender categories. Such societies likely were largely egalitarian, beyond
distinctions based on age and gender, virtually all people had equivalent rights,
status, and access to resources.
Archaeologist Donald Henry suggests that the combination of a rich habitat and
sedentism (permanent, year-round settlement) led to a dramatic increase in human
population. In his view, nomadic, simple foragers have relatively low levels of
fertility. Their high-protein, low-carbohydrate diets result in low body-fat levels,
which are commonly associated with low fertility in women. High levels of
physical activity and long periods of nursing, which are common among modern
simple foragers, probably also contributed to low levels of female fertility if they
were likewise common among ancient foragers.
In Henry's view, the adoption of a more settled existence in areas
with abundant food resources would have contributed to higher fertility levels
among the sedentary foragers. A diet higher in wild cereals produces
proportionally more body fat, leading to higher fertility among women. Cereals,
which are easy to digest, would have supplemented and then replaced mother's
milk as the primary food for older infants. Since women are less fertile when they
are breast-feeding, substituting cereals for mother's milk would have resulted in
closer spacing of births and the potential for a greater number of live births for
each woman. A more sedentary existence may also have lowered infant mortality
[354]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
and perhaps increased longevity among the aged. These more vulnerable members
of society could safely stay in a fixed village rather than be forced regularly to
move great distances as part of a nomadic existence, with its greater risk of
accidents and trauma.
All of these factors may have resulted in a trend of increasing size among some
local human populations in the Holocene (since 9600 B C E ). Given sufficient
time, even in very rich habitats, human population size can reach carrying capacity,
the maximum population an area can sustain within the context of a given
subsistence system. And human population growth is like a runaway tram once it
picks up speed, it is difficult to control. So even after reaching an area’s carrying
capacity, Holocene human populations probably continued to grow in food-rich
regions, overshooting the ability of the territory to feed the population, again
within the context of the same subsistence strategy. In some areas, small changes
in climate or minor changes in plant characteristics may have further destabilized
local economies.
One possible response to surpassing the carrying capacity of a region is for a group
to exploit adjoining land. However, good land may itself be limited—for example,
within the confines of a river valley where neighbors are in the same position,
having filled up the whole of the desirable habitat available in their home
territories, expansion is also problematic. Impinging on the neighbors' territory can
lead to conflict, especially when they too are up against the capacity of the land to
provide enough food.
Another option is to stay in the same area but to shift and intensify the food quest
there. The impulse to produce more food to feed a growing population was
satisfied in some areas by the development of more-complex subsistence strategies
involving intensive labor and requiring more cooperation and greater coordination
[355]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
among the increasing numbers of people. This development resulted in a change in
the social and economic equations that defined those societies. Hierarchies that did
not exist in earlier foraging groups but that were helpful in structuring cooperative
labor and in organizing more-complex technologies probably became established,
even before domestication and agriculture, as pre-Neolithic societies (before the
tenth millennium B C E) reacted to the population increase.
[356]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Seasonal Succession In Phytoplankton
Phytoplankton are minute, free-floating aquatic plants. In addition to the marked
changes in abundance observed in phytoplankton over the course of a year, there is
also a marked change in species composition.This change in the dominant species
from season to season is called seasonal succession, and it occurs m a wide variety
of locations. Under seasonal succession, one or more species dominate the
phytoplankton for a shorter or longer period of time and then are replaced by
another set of species. This pattern is repeated yearly. This succession is different
from typical terrestrial ecological succession in which various plants replace one
another until finally a so-called climax community develops, which persists for
many years.
What are the factors causing this phenomenon? Considering that seasonal
succession is most often and clearly seen in temperate seas, which have a marked
change in temperature during a year, temperature has been suggested as a cause.
This may be one of the factors, but it is unlikely to be the sole cause because there
are species that become dominant species at various temperatures. Furthermore,
temperature changes rather slowly in seawater, and the replacement of dominant
species often is much more rapid.
Another suggested reason is the change in nutrient level over the year,
with differing concentrations favoring different phytoplanklon species. While this
factor may also contribute, observations suggest that phytoplankton populations
rise and fall much more quickly than nutrient concentrations change.
Yet another explanation is that species succession is a consequence of changes in
seawater brought about by the phytoplankton living in it. Each species of
phytoplankton secretes or excretes organic molecules into the seawater. These
[357]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
metabolites can have an effect on the organisms living in the seawater, either
inhibiting or promoting their growth. For any individual organism, the amount of
metabolite secreted is small. But the effect of secretions by all the individuals of
the dominant species can be significant both for themselves and for other species.
These organic metabolites could, and probably do, include a number of different
classes of organic compounds. Some are likely toxins, such as those released by
the dinoflagellates (a species of plankton) during red tides, which inhibit growth of
other photosynthetic organisms. In such cases, the population explosion of
dinoflagellates is so great that the water becomes brownish red in color from the
billions of dinoflagellate cells. Although each cell secretes a minute amount of
toxin, the massivedinoflagellate numbers cause the toxin to reach concentrations
that kill many creatures. This toxin can be concentrated in such filter-feeding
organisms as clams and mussels, rendering them toxic to humans.
Another class of metabolite is the vitamins. It is now known that certain
phytoplankton species have requirements for certain vitamins, and that there
are considerable differences among species as to requirements. The B vitamins,
especially vitamin B12, thiamine and biotin, seem to be the most generally
required Some species may be unable to thrive until a particular vitamin, or group
of vitamins, is present in the water. These vitamins are produced only by another
species: hence, a succession of species could occur whereby first the vitamin-
producing species is present and then the vitamin-requiring species follows.
Other organic compounds that may inhibit or promote various species include
amino acids, carbohydrates, and fatty acids. Although it is suspected that these
organic metabolites may have an important role in species succession and it has
been demonstrated in the laboratory that phytoplankton species vary both in their
[358]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
ability to produce necessary vitamins and in their requirements for such in order to
grow, evidence is still inadequate as to their real role in the sea.
There is also evidence to suggest that grazers (animals that feed on plants or
stationary animals), particularly selective grazers, can influence the phytoplankton
species composition. Many copepods (small, herbivorous crustaceans) and
invertebrate larvae pick out selected phytoplankton species from mixed groups,
changing the species composition.
A growing body of evidence now suggests that all of the factors considered here
are operating simultaneously to produce species succession. The importance of any
factor will vary with the particular phytoplankton species and the environmental
conditions.
[359]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 36
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[360]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Soil Formation
Living organisms play an essential role in soil formation. The numerous plants and
animals living in the soil release minerals from the parent material from which soil
is formed, supply organic matter, aid in the translocation (movement) and aeration
of the soil, and help protect the soil from erosion. The types of organisms growing
or living in the soil greatly influence the soil's physical and chemical
characteristics. In fact, for mature soils in many parts of the world, the
predominant type of natural vegetation is considered the most important direct
influence on soil characteristics. For this reason, a soil scientist can tell a great deal
about the attributes of the soil in any given area simply from knowing what kind of
flora the soil supports. Thus prairies and tundra regions, which have characteristic
vegetations, also have characteristic soils.
The quantity and total weight of soil flora generally exceed that of soil fauna. By
far the most numerous and smallest of the plants living in soil are bacteria. Under
favorable conditions, a million or more of these tiny, single-celled plants can
inhabit each cubic centimeter of soil. It is the bacteria, more than any other
organisms, that enable rock or other parent material to undergo the gradual
transformation to soil. Some bacteria produce organic acids that directly attack
parent material, breaking it down and releasing plant nutrients. Others decompose
organic litter (debris) to form humus (nutrient-rich organic matter). A third group
of bacteria inhabits the root systems of plants called legumes. These include many
important agricultural crops, such as alfalfa, clover, soybeans, peas, and
peanuts. The bacteria that legumes host within their root nodules (small swellings
on the root) change nitrogen gas from the atmosphere into nitrogen compounds
that plants are able to metabolize, a process, known as nitrogen fixation, that
[361]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
makes the soil more fertile. Other microscopic plants also are important in soil
development. For example, in highly acidic soils where few bacteria can survive,
fungi frequently become the chief decomposers of organic matter.
More complex forms of vegetation play several vital roles with respect to the
soil. Tress, grass, and other large plants supply the bulk of the soil's humus. The
minerals released as these plants decompose on the surface constitute an important
nutrient source for succeeding generations of plants as well as for other soil
organisms. In addition, trees can extend their roots deep within the soil and bring
up nutrients from far below the surface. These nutrients eventually enrich the
surface soil when the tree drops its leaves or when it dies and decomposes. Finally,
trees perform the vital function of slowing water runoff and holding the soil in
place with their root systems, thus combating erosion. The increased erosion that
often accompanies agricultural use of sloping land is principally caused by the
removal of its protective cover of natural vegetation.
Animals also influence soil composition. The faunal counterparts of bacteria are
protozoa. These single-celled organisms are the most numerous representatives of
the animal kingdom, and, like bacteria, a million or more can sometimes inhabit
each cubic centimeter of soil. Protozoa feed on organic matter and hasten its
decomposition. Among other soil-dwelling animals, the earthworm is probably the
most important. Under exceptionally favorable conditions, up to a million
earthworms (with a total body weight exceeding 450 kilograms) may inhabit an
acre of soil. Earthworms ingest large quantities of soil, chemically alter it, and
excrete it as organic matter called casts. The casts form a high-quality natural
fertilizer. In addition, earthworms mix of soil both vertically and horizontally,
improving aeration and drainage.
[362]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Insects such as ants and termites also can be exceedingly numerous under
favorable climatic and soil conditions. In addition, mammals such as moles, field
mice, gophers, and prairie dogs sometimes are present in sufficient numbers to
have significant impact on the soil. These animals primarily work the soil
mechanically. As a result, the soil is aerated broken up, fertilized, and brought to
the surface, hastening soil development.
www.ZabanExam.com
[363]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Early Ideas About Deep-sea Biology
In 1841 Edward Forbes was offered the chance to serve as naturalist aboard HMS
Beacon, an English Royal Navy ship assigned to survey the Aegean Sea. For a year
and a half the Beacon crisscrossed the Aegean waters. During that time Forbes was
able to drag this small, triangular dredge - a tool with a leather net for capturing
creatures along the sea bottom - at a hundred locations, at depths ranging from 6 to
1380 feet. He collected hundreds of different species of animals, and he saw that
they were distributed in eight different depth zones, each containing its own
distinct assemblage of animal life, the way zones of elevation on the side of a
mountain are populated by distinct sets of plants.
Forbes also thought he saw, as he later told the British Association, that "the
number of species and individuals diminishes as we descend, pointing to a zero in
the distribution of animal life as yet unvisited." This zero, Forbes casually
speculated-he simply extended a line on his graph of animal number versus depth-
probably began at a depth of 1,800 feet. Below that was the final zone in Forbes's
scheme, zone nine, a zone that covered most of the ocean floor and thus most of
the solid surface of Earth: Forbes called this the azoic zone, where no animal, to
say nothing of plants, could survive.
Forbes's azoic zone was entirely plausible at the time, and it was certainly far from
the strangest idea that was then entertained about the deep sea. In the first decade
of the nineteenth century, a French naturalist named Francois Peron had sailed
around the world measuring the temperature of the ocean. He found that the deeper
the water, the colder it got, and he concluded that the seafloor was covered with a
thick layer of ice. Peron ignored the fact that water expands when it freezes and
that ice therefore floats. A more popular belief at the time was that water at great
[364]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
depth would be compressed to such a density that nothing could sink through
it. This ignored the fact that water is all but incompressible. But even the
more sensible naturalists of the day were guilty of a similar misconception. They
imagined the deep sea as being filled with an unmoving and undisturbable pool of
cold, dense water. In reality the deep is always being refreshed by cold water
sinking from above.
The central implication of all these misconceptions was that nothing could live in
the abyss (deep), just as Forbes's observations seemed to indicate. But Forbes erred
in two ways. One was the particular study site he happened to use as a springboard
for his sweeping postulate of a lifeless abyss. Although the Aegean had been the
birthplace of marine biology, its depths are now known to be exceptionally lacking
in animal diversity. Moreover, through no fault of his own, Forbes was not
particularly successful at sampling such life as did exist at the bottom of the
Aegean. It was his dredge that was inadequate. Its opening was so small and the
holes in the net so large that the dredge inevitably missed animals. Many of those it
did catch must have poured out of its open mouth when Forbes reeled it in. His
azoic zone, then, was a plausible but wild extrapolation from pioneering but feeble
data.
As it turned out, the existence of the azoic zone had been disproved even before
Forbes suggested it, and the theory continued to be contradicted regularly
throughout its long and influential life. Searching for the Northwest Passage from
the Atlantic to the Pacific in 1818, Sir John Ross had lowered his "deep-sea
clam"—a sort of bivalved sediment scoop-into the water of Baffin Bay ( an inlet
between the Atlantic and Arctic oceans), which the determined to be more than a
thousand fathoms deep in some places. Modern soundings indicate he
overestimated his depths by several hundred fathoms, but in any case Ross's clam
[365]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
dove several times deeper than Forbes's dredge. It brought back mud laced with
worms, and starfish that dad entangled themselves in the line at depths well below
the supposed boundary of the azoic zone.
[366]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Industrial Melanism: The Case of the
Peppered Moth
The idea of natural selection is that organisms in a species that have characteristics
favoring survival are most likely to survive and produce offspring with the same
characteristics. Because the survival of organisms with particular characteristics is
favored over the survival of other organisms in the same species that lack these
characteristics, future generations of the species are likely to include more
organisms with the favorable characteristics.
One of the most thoroughly analyzed examples of natural selection in operation is
the change in color that has occurred in certain populations of the peppered moth,
Biston betularia, in industrial regions of Europe during the past 100 years.
Originally moths were uniformly pale gray or whitish in color; dark-colored
(melanic) individuals were rare and made up less than 2 percent of the
population. Over a period of decades, dark-colored forms became an increasingly
large fraction of some populations and eventually came to dominate peppered moth
populations in certain areas —especially those of extreme industrialization such as
the Ruhr Valley of Germany and the Midlands of England. Coal from industry
released large amounts of black soot into the environment, but the increase of the
dark-colored forms was not due to genetic mutations caused by industrial
pollution. For example, caterpillars that feed on soot-covered leaves did not give
rise to dark- colored adults. Rather, pollution promoted the survival of dark forms
on soot-covered trees. Melanics were normally quickly eliminated in nonindustrial
areas by adverse selection; birds spotted them easily. This phenomenon, an
increase in the frequency of dark-colored mutants in polluted areas, is known as
[367]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
industrial melanism. The North American equivalent of this story is another
moth, the swettaria form of Biston cognataria, first noticed in industrialized areas
such as Chicago and New York City in the early 1900s. By 1961 it constituted over
90 percent of the population in parts of Michigan.
The idea that natural selection was responsible for the changing ratio of dark- to
light-colored peppered moths was developed in the 1950s by H. B. D. Kettlewell
of Oxford University. If natural selection was the explanation, then there should be
different survival rates for dark- and light- colored moths. To determine whether
this was true, Kettlewell released thousands of light and dark moths (each marked
with a paint spot) into rural and industrialized areas. In the nonindustrial area of
Dorset, he recaptured 14.6 percent of the pale forms but only 4.7 percent of the
dark forms. In the industrial area of Birmingham, the situation was reversed: 13
percent of pale forms but 27.5 percent of dark forms were recaptured.
Clearly some environmental factor was responsible for the greater survival rates of
dark moths. Birds were predators of peppered moths. Kettlewell hypothesized that
the normal pale forms are difficult to see when resting on lichen-covered trees,
whereas dark forms are conspicuous. In industrialized areas, lichens are destroyed
by pollution, tree barks become darker, and dark moths are the ones birds have
difficulty detecting. As a test, Kettlewell set up hidden observation positions and
watched birds voraciously eat moths placed |on tree trunks of a contrasting color.
The action of natural selection in producing a small but highly significant step of
evolution was seemingly demonstrated, with birds as the selecting force.
Not every researcher has been convinced that natural selection by birds is the only
explanation of the observed frequencies of dark and light peppered moths. More
recent data, however, provide additional support for Kettleweir's ideas about
natural selection. The light-colored form of the peppered moth is making a strong
[368]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
comeback. In Britain, a Clean Air Act was passed in 1965. Sir Cyril Clarke has
been trapping moths at his home in Liverpool, Merseyside, since 1959. Before
about 1975, 90 percent of the moths were dark, but since then there has been a
steep decline in melanic forms, and in 1989 only 29.6 percent of the moths caught
were melanic. The mean concentration of sulphur dioxide pollution fell from about
300 micrograms per cubic meter in 1970 to less than 50 micrograms per cubic
meter in 1975 and has remained fairly constant since then. If the spread of the
light-colored form of the moth continues at the same speed as the melanic form
spread .in the last century, soon the melanic form will again be only an occasional
resident of the Liverpool area.
[369]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 37
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[370]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Thales And The Milesians
While many other observers and thinkers had laid the groundwork for science,
Thales (circa 624 B.C.E-ca 547 B.C.E.), the best known of the earliest Greek
philosophers, made the first steps toward a new, more objective approach to
finding out about the world. He posed a very basic question: "What is the world
made of? " Many others had asked the same question before him, but Thales based
his answer strictly on what he had observed and what he could reason out-not on
imaginative stories about the gods or the supernatural. He proposed water as the
single substance from which everything in the world was made and developed a
model of the universe with Earth as a flat disk floating in water.
Like most of the great Greek philosophers, Thales had an influence on others
around him. His two best-known followers, though there were undoubtedly others
who attained less renown, were Anaximander and Anaximenes. Both were also
from Miletus (located on the southern coast of present-day Turkey) and so, like
Thales, were members of the Milesian School. Much more is known about
Anaximander than about Anaximenes, probably because Anaximander, who was
born sometime around 610 B.C.E, ambitiously attempted to write
a comprehensivehistory of the universe. As would later happen between another
teacher-student pair of philosophers, Plato and Aristotle, Anaximander disagreed
with his teacher despite his respect for him. He doubted that the world and all its
contents could be made of water and proposed instead a formless and unobservable
substance he called "apeiron" that was the source of all matter.
Anaximander's most important contributions, though, were in other areas.
Although he did not accept that water was the prime element, he did believe that
all life originated in the sea, and he was thus one of the first to conceive of this
[371]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
important idea. Anaximander is credited with drawing up the first world map of the
Greeks and also with recognizing that Earth's surface was curved.He believed,
though, that the shape of Earth was that of a cylinder rather than the sphere that
later Greek philosophers would conjecture. Anaximander, observing the motions of
the heavens around the polestar, was probably the first of the Greek philosophers
to picture the sky as sphere completely surrounding Earth-an idea that, elaborated
upon later, would prevail until the advent of the Scientific Revolution in the
seventeenth century.
Unfortunately, most of Anaximander's written history of the universe was lost, and
only a few fragments survive today. Little is known about his other ideas.
Unfortunately, too, most of the written work for Anaximenes, who may have been
Anaximander's pupil, has also been lost. All we can say for certain about
Anaximenes, who was probably born around 560 BCE, is that following in the
tradition of Anaximander, he also disagreed with his mentor. The world, according
to Anaximenes, was not composed of either water or apeiron, but air itself was the
fundamental element of the universe. Compressed, it became water and earth, and
when rarefied or thinned out, it heated up to become fire. Anaximenes may have
also been the first to study rainbows and speculate upon their natural rather than
supernatural cause.
With the door opened by Thales and the other early philosophers of Milestus,
Greek thinkers began to speculate about the nature of the universe. This exciting
burst of intellectual activity was for the most part purely creative. The Greeks,
from Thales to Plato and Aristotle, were philosophers and not scientists in today's
sense. It is possible for anyone to create "ideas" about the nature and structure of
the universe, for instance, and many times these ideas can be so consistent and
elaborately structured, or just so apparently obvious, that they can be persuasive to
[372]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
many people. A scientific theory about the universe, however, demands much
more than the various observations and analogies that were woven together to form
systems of reasoning, carefully constructed as they were, that would
eventually culminate in Aristotle's model of the world and the universe. Without
experimentation and objective, critical testing of their theories, the best these
thinkers could hope to achieve was some internally consistent speculation that
covered all the bases and satisfied the demands of reason.
www.ZabanExam.com
[373]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Direct Species Translocation
It is becoming increasingly common for conservationists to move individual
animals or entire species from one site to another. This may be either to establish a
new population where a population of conspecifics (animals or plants belonging to
the same species) has become extinct or to add individuals to an existing
population. The former is termed reintroduction and the latter reinforcement. In
both cases, wild individuals are captured in one location and translocated directly
to another.
Direct translocation has been used a wide range of plants and animals and was
carried out to maintain populations as a source of food long before conservation
was a familiar term. The number of translocations carried out under the banner of
conservation has increased rapidly, and this has led to criticism of the technique
because of the lack of evaluation of its efficacy and because of its potential
disadvantages. The nature of translocation ranges from highly organized and
researched national or international programs to ad hoc releases of rescued animals
by well- intentioned animal lovers. In a fragmented landscape where many
populations and habitats are isolated from others, translocations can play an
effective role in conservation strategies; they can increase the number of existing
populations or increase the size, genetic diversity, and demographic balance of a
small population, consequently increasing its chances of survival.
Translocation clearly has a role in the recovery of species that
have substantially declined and is the most likely method by which many sedentary
species can recover all or part of their former range. However, against this is the
potential for reinforcement translocations to spread disease from one population to
another or to introduce deleterious or maladaptive genes to a population.
[374]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Additionally, translocation of predators or competitors may have negative impacts
on other species, resulting in an overall loss of diversity. Last but not least of these
considerations is the effort and resources required in this type of action, which
need to be justified by evidence of the likely benefits.
Despite the large number of tranlocations that have taken place, there is
surprisingly little evidence of the efficacy of such actions. This is partly because
many translocations have not been strictly for conservation; neither have they been
official nor legal, let alone scientific in their approach. Successful translocations
inevitably get recorded and gain attention, whereas failures may never be recorded
at all. This makes appraisal of the method very difficult. One key problem is a
definition of success. Is translocation successful if the individuals survive the first
week or a year, or do they need to reproduce for one or several generations?
Whatever the answer, it is clear that a general framework is required to ensure that
any translocation is justified, has a realistic chance of success, and will
be properly monitored and evaluated for the benefit of future efforts.
An example of apparent translocation success involves the threatened Seychelles
warbler. This species was once confined to Cousin Island, one of the Seychelles
islands, and reduced to 26 individuals. Careful habitat management increased this
number to over 300 birds, but the single population remained vulnerable to local
catastrophic events. The decision was taken to translocate individuals to two
nearby islands to reduce this risk. The translocations took place in 1988 and 1990,
and both have resulted in healthy breeding populations. A successful translocation
exercise also appears to have been achieved with red howler monkeys in French
Guiana. A howler population was translocated from a site due to be flooded for
hydroelectric power generation. The release site was an area where local hunting
had reduced the density of the resident howler population. Released troops of
[375]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
monkeys were kept under visual observation and followed by radio tracking of 16
females. Although the troops appeared to undergo initial problems, causing them to
split up, all the tracked females settled into normal behavioral patterns.
Unfortunately, the success stories are at least matched by accounts of failure.
Reviewing translocation of amphibians and reptiles, researchers C.Kenneth Dodd
and Richard A. Siegel concluded that most projects have not demonstrated success
as conservation techniques and should not be advocated as though they were
acceptable management and mitigation practices.
[376]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Modern Architecture In The United States
At the end of the nineteenth century, there were basically two kinds of buildings in
the United States. On one hand were the buildings produced for the wealthy or for
civic purposes, which tended to echo the architecture of the past and to use
traditional styles of ornamentation. On the other hand were purely utilitarian
structures, such as factories and grain elevators, which employed modern materials
such as steel girders and plate glass in an undisguised and unadorned manner. Such
buildings, however, were viewed in a category separate from "fine" architecture,
and in fact were often designed by engineers and builders rather than architects.
The development of modern architecture might in large part be seen as an
adaptation of this sort of functional building and its pervasive application for daily
use. Indeed, in this influential book Toward a New Architecture, the Swiss
architect Le Corbusier illustrated his text with photographs of American factories
and grain storage silos, as well as ships, airplanes, and other industrial objects.
Nonetheless, modern architects did not simply employ these new materials in a
strictly practical fashion—they consciously exploited their aesthetic possibilities.
For example, glass could be used to open up walls and eliminate their stone and
brick masonry because large spaces could now be spanned with steel beams.
The fundamental premise of modern architecture was that the appearance of the
building should exhibit the nature of its materials and forms of physical support.
This often led to effects that looked odd from a traditional standpoint but that
became hallmarks of modern architecture for precisely this reason. For example, in
traditional architecture, stone or brick walls served a structural role, but in a steel-
beam building the walls were essentially hung from the internal skeleton of steel
beams, which meant that walls and corners no longer needed to be solid but could
[377]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
be opened up in unexpected ways. At the Fagus shoe factory in Germany, for
example, German architect Walter Gropius placed glass walls in the corners,
effectively breaking open the box of traditional architecture and creating a new
sense of light and openness. Similarly, steel beams could be used to construct
balconies that projected out from the building without any support beneath them.
These dramatic balconies quickly became a signature of modern architects such as
Frank Lloyd Wright. Wright's most dramatic residence, Fallingwater, has balconies
that thrust far out over a stream in a way that seems to defy gravity.
The ways in which new technology transformed architectural design are
dramatically illustrated through the evolution of the high-rise office building. After
ten or twelve stories, masonry construction reaches a maximum possible height,
since it runs into difficulties of compression and of inadequate lateral strength to
combat wind shear. Steel construction, on the other hand, can support a building of
50 or 100 stories without difficulty. Such buildings were so different from any
previous form of architecture that they quickly acquired a new name—the
skyscraper.
From the standpoint of real estate developers, the purpose of skyscrapers was to
increase rental space in valuable urban locations. But to create usable high-rise
buildings, a number of technical challenges needed to be solved. One problem was
getting people to the upper floors, since after five or six stories it becomes
exhausting to climb stairs. Updated and electrified versions of the freight elevator
that had been introduced by Elisha Graves Otis in 1853 (several decades before
skyscraper construction) solved this problem. Another issue was fire safety. The
metal supporting buildings became soft when exposed to fire and collapsed
relatively quickly. (They could melt at 2700 Fahrenheit, whereas major fires
achieve temperatures of 3000degrees). However, when the metal is encased in fire-
[378]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
retardant materials, its vulnerability to fire is much decreased. In Chicago, a system
was developed for surrounding the metal components with hollow tiles made from
brick-like terra-cotta. Such tiles are impervious to fire.The terra-cotta tiles were
used both to encase the supporting members and as flooring. A structure built with
steel beams protected by terra-cotta tiles was still three times lighter than a
comparably sized building that used masonry construction, so the weight of the
tiles was not a problem.
[379]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 38
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[380]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Microscopes
Before microscopes were first used in the seventeenth century, no one knew that
living organisms were composed of cells. The first microscopes were light
microscopes, which work by passing visible light through a specimen. Glass lenses
in the microscope bend the light to magnify the image of the specimen and project
the image into the viewer's eye or onto photographic film. Light microscopes can
magnify objects up to 1,000 times without causing blurriness.
Magnification, the increase in the apparent size of an object, is one important
factor in microscopy. Also important is resolving power, a measure of the clarity of
an image. Resolving power is the ability of an optical instrument to show two
objects as separate. For example, what looks to the unaided eye like a single star in
the sky may be resolved as two stars with the help of a telescope. Any optical
device is limited by its resolving power. The light microscope cannot resolve detail
finer than 0.2 micrometers, about the size of the smallest bacterium; consequently,
no matter how many times its image of such a bacterium is magnified, the light
microscope cannot show the details of the cell's internal structure.
From the year 1665, when English microscopist Robert Hooke discovered cells,
until the middle of the twentieth century, biologists had only light microscopes for
viewing cells. But they discovered a great deal, including the cells composing
animal and plant tissues, microscopic organisms, and some of the structures within
cells. By the mid-1800s, these discoveries led to the cell theory, which states that
all living things are composed of cells and that all cells come from other cells.
Our knowledge of cell structure took a giant leap forward as biologists began using
the electron microscope in the 1950s. Instead of light, the electron microscope uses
a beam of electrons and has a much higher resolving power than the light
[381]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
microscope. In fact, the most powerful modern electron microscopes can
distinguish objects as small as 0.2 nanometers, a thousandfold improvement over
the light microscope. The period at the end of this sentence is about a million times
bigger than an object 0.2 nanometers in diameter, which is the size of a large atom.
Only under special conditions can electron microscopes detect individual atoms.
However, cells, cellular organelles, and even molecules like DNA and protein are
much larger than single atoms.
Biologists use the scanning electron microscope to study the detailed architecture
of cell surfaces. It uses an electron beam to scan the surface of a cell or group of
cells that have been coated with metal. The metal stops the beam from going
through the cells. When the metal is hit by the beam, it emits electrons. The
electrons are focused to form an image of the outside of the cells. The scanning
electron microscope produces images that look three-dimensional.
The transmission electron microscope, on the other hands, is used to study the
details of internal cell structure. Specimens are cut into extremely thin sections,
and the transmission electron microscope aims an electron beam through a section,
just as a light microscope aims a beam of light through a specimen. However,
instead of lenses made of glass, the transmission electron microscope uses
electromagnets as lenses, as do all electron microscopes. The electromagnets bend
the electron beam to magnify and focus an image onto a viewing screen or
photographic film.
Electron microscopes have truly revolutionized the study of cells and cell
organelles. Nonetheless, they have not replaced the light microscope.One problem
with electron microscopes is that they cannot be used to study living specimens
because the specimen must be held in a vacuum chamber; that is, all the air and
liquid must be removed. For a biologist studying a living process, such as the
[382]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
whirling movement of a bacterium, a light microscope equipped with a video
camera might be better than either a scanning electron microscope or a
transmission electron microscope. Thus, the light microscope remains a useful tool,
especially for studying living cells. The size of a cell often determines the type of
microscope a biologist uses to study it.
www.ZabanExam.com
[383]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The Raccoons's Success
Raccoons have a vast transcontinental distribution, occurring throughout most of
North America and Central America. They are found from southern Canada all the
way to Panama, as well as on islands near coastal areas. They occur in each of the
49 states of the continental United States. Although raccoons are native only to the
Western Hemisphere, they have been successfully transplanted to other parts of the
globe.
Following a decline to a relatively low population level in the 1930s, raccoons
began to prosper following their 1943 breeding season. A rapid population surge
continued throughout the 1940s, and high numbers have been sustained ever since.
By the late 1980s, the number of raccoons in North America was estimated to be at
least 15 to 20 times the number that existed during the 1930s. By now, their
numbers have undoubtedly grown even more, as they have continued to expand
into new habitats where they were once either rare or absent, such as sandy
prairies, deserts, coastal marshes, and mountains. Their spread throughout the
Rocky Mountain West is indicative of the fast pace at which they can exploit new
environments. Despite significant numbers being harvested and having suffered
occasional declines, typically because of disease, the raccoon
has consistently maintained high population levels.
Several factors explain the raccoon's dramatic increase in abundance and
distribution. First, their success has been partially attributed to the growth of cities,
as they often thrive in suburban and even urban settings. Furthermore, they have
been deliberately introduced throughout the continent. Within the United States,
they are commonly taken from one area to another, both legally and illegally, to
restock hunting areas and, presumably, because people simply want them to be part
[384]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
of their local fauna. Their appearance and subsequent flourishing in Utah's Great
Salt Lake valley within the last 40 years appears to be from such an introduction.
As an example of the ease with which transplanted individuals can succeed,
raccoons from Indiana (midwestern United States) have reportedly been able to
flourish on islands off the coast of Alaska.
The raccoon's expansion in various areas may also be due to the spread of
agriculture. Raccoons have been able to exploit crops, especially corn but also
cereal grains, which have become dependable food sources for them. The
expansion of agriculture, however, does not necessarily lead to rapid increases in
their abundance. Farming in Kansas and eastern Colorado (central and western
United States) proceeded rapidly in the 1870s and 1880s, but this was about 50
years before raccoons started to spread out from their major habitat, the wooded
river bottomlands. They have also expanded into many areas lacking any
agriculture other than grazing and into places without forests or permanent
streams.
Prior to Europeans settling and farming the Great Plains Region, raccoons
probably were just found along its rivers and streams and in the wooded areas of its
southeastern section. With the possible exception of the southern part of the
province of Manitoba, their absence was notable throughout Canada. They first
became more widely distributed in the southern part of Manitoba, and by the 1940s
were abundant throughout its southeastern portion. In the 1950s their population
swelled in Canada. The control of coyotes in the prairie region in the 1950s may
have been a factor in raccoon expansion. If their numbers are sufficient coyotes
might be able to suppress raccoon populations (though little direct evidence
supports this notion). By the 1960s the raccoon had become a major predator of the
canvasback ducks nesting in southwestern Manitoba.
[385]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The extermination of the wolf from most of the contiguous United States may have
been a critical factor in the raccoon's expansion and numerical increase. In the
eighteenth century, when the wolfs range included almost all of North America,
raccoons apparently were abundant only in the deciduous forests of the East, Gulf
Coast, and Great Lakes regions, though they also extended into the wooded
bottomlands of the Midwest's major rivers. In such areas, their arboreal habits and
the presence of hollow den trees should have offered some protection from wolves
and other large predators. Even though raccoons may not have been a significant
part of their diet, wolves surely would have tried to prey on those exposed in
relatively treeless areas.
[386]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Transgenic Plants
Genes from virtually any organism, from viruses to humans, can now be inserted
into plants, creating what are known as transgenic plants. Now used in agriculture,
there are approximately 109 million acres of transgenic crops grown worldwide, 68
percent of which are in the United States. The most common transgenic crops are
soybeans, corn, cotton, and canola. Most often, these plants either contain a gene
making them resistant to the herbicide glyphosate or they contain an insect-
resistant gene that produces a protein called Bt toxin.
On the positive side, proponents of transgenic crops argue that these crops are
environmentally friendly because they allow farmers to use fewer and less noxious
chemicals for crop production. For example, a 21 percent reduction in the use of
insecticide has been reported on Bt cotton (transgenic cotton that produces Bt
toxin). In addition, when glyphosate is used to control weeds, other
more persistent herbicides do not need to be applied.
On the negative side, opponents of transgenic crops suggest that there are many
questions that need to be answered before transgenic crops are grown on a large
scale. One question deals with the effects that Bt plants have on nontarget
organisms such as beneficial insects, worms, and birds that consume the
genetically engineered crop. For example, monarch caterpillars feeding on
milkweed plants near Bt cornfields will eat some corn pollen that has fallen on the
milkweed leaves. Laboratory studies indicate that caterpillars can die from eating
Bt pollen. However, field tests indicate that Bt corn is not likely to harm monarchs.
Furthermore, the application of pesticides (the alternative to growing Bt plants) has
been demonstrated to cause widespread harm to nontarget insects.
[387]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Another unanswered question is whether herbicide-resistant genes will move into
the populations of weeds. Crop plants are sometimes grown in areas where weedy
relatives also live. If the crop plants hybridize and reproduce with weedy relatives,
then this herbicide-resistant gene will be perpetuated in the offspring. In this way,
the resistant gene can make its way into the weed population. If this happens, a
farmer can no longer use glyphosate, for example, to kill those
weeds. This scenario is not likely to occur in many instances because there are no
weedy relatives growing near the crop plant. However, in some cases, it may
become a serious problem. For example, canola readily hybridizes with mustard
weed species and could transfer its herbicide-resistant genes to those weeds.
We know that evolution will occur when transgenic plants grown on a large scale
over a period of time. Of special concern is the development of insect populations
resistant to the Bt toxin. This pesticide has been applied to plants for decades
without the development of insect-resistant populations. However, transgenic Bt
plants express the toxin in all tissues throughout growing season. Therefore, all
insects carrying genes that make them susceptible to the toxin will die. That leaves
only the genetically resistant insects alive to perpetuate the population. When these
resistant insects mate, they will produce a high proportion of offspring capable of
surviving in the presence of the Bt toxin. Farmers are attempting to slow the
development of insect resistance in Bt crops by, for example, planting
nontransgenic border rows to provide a refuge for susceptible insects. These
insects may allow Bt susceptibility to remain in the population.
Perhaps the most serious concern about the transgenic crop plants currently in use
is that they encourage farmers to move farther away from sustainable agricultural
farming practices, meaning ones that allow natural resources to continually
regenerate over the long run.Transgenics, at least superficially, simplify farming by
[388]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
reducing the choices made by the manager. Planting a glyphosate-resistant crop
commits a farmer to using that herbicide for the reason, probably to the exclusion
of all other herbicides and other weed-control practices. Farmers who use Bt
transgenics may not feel that they need to follow through with integrated pest-
management practices that use beneficial insects and timely applications of
pesticides to control insect pests. A more sustainable approach would be to plant
nontransgenic corn, monitor the fields throughout the growing season, and then
apply a pesticide only if and when needed.
[389]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 39
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[390]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Early Writing Systems
Scholars agree that writing originated somewhere in the Middle East, probably
Mesopotamia, around the fourth millennium B.C.E. It is from the great libraries
and word-hoards of these ancient lands that the first texts emerged. They were
written on damp clay tablets with a wedged (or V-shaped) stick; since the Latin
word for wedge is cunea, the texts are called cuneiform. The clay tablets usually
were not fired; sun drying was probably reckoned enough to preserve the text for
as long as it was being used. Fortunately, however, many tablets survived because
they were accidentally fired when the buildings they were stored in burned.
Cuneiform writing lasted for some 3,000 years, in a vast line of succession that ran
through Sumer, Akkad, Assyria, Nineveh, and Babylon, and preserved for us
fifteen languages in an area represented by modern-day Iraq, Syria, and western
Iran. The oldest cuneiform texts recorded the transactions of tax collectors and
merchants, the receipts and bills of sale of an urban society. They had to do with
things like grain, goats, and real estate. Later, Babylonian scribes recorded the laws
and kept other kinds of records. Knowledge conferred power. As a result, the
scribes were assigned their own goddess, Nisaba, later replaced by the god Nabu of
Borsippa, whose symbol is neither weapon nor dragon but something far more
fearsome, the cuneiform stick.
Cuneiform texts on science, astronomy, medicine, and mathematics abound, some
offering astoundingly precise data. One tablet records the speed of the Moon over
248 days; another documents an early sighting of Halley's Comet, from September
22 to September 28, 164 B.C.E.More esoteric texts attempt to explain old
Babylonian customs, such as the procedure for curing someone who is ill, which
included rubbing tar and gypsum on the sick person's door and drawing a design at
[391]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
the foot of the person's bed. What is clear from the vast body of texts (some 20,000
tablets were found in King Ashurbanipal's library at Nineveh) is that scribes took
pride in their writing and knowledge.
The foremost cuneiform text, the Babylonian Epic of Gilgamesh, deals with
humankind's attempts to conquer time. In it, Gilgamesh, king and warrior, is
crushed by the death of his best friend and so sets out on adventures that prefigure
mythical heroes of ancient Greek legends such as Hercules. His goal is not just to
survive his ordeals but to make sense of this life. Remarkably, versions of
Gilgamesh span 1,500 years, between 2100 B.C.E and 600 B.C.E., making the
story the epic of an entire civilization.
The ancient Egyptians invented a different way of writing and a new substance to
write on - papyrus, a precursor of paper, made from a wetland plant. The Greeks
had a special name for this writing: hieroglyphic, literally "sacred writing". This,
they thought, was language fit for the gods, which explains why it was carved on
walls of pyramids and other religious structures. Perhaps hieroglyphics are Egypt's
great contribution to the history of writing: hieroglyphic wiring, in use from 3100
B.C.E. until 394 C.E., resulted in the creation of texts that were fine art as well as
communication. Egypt gave us the tradition of the scribe not just as educated
person but as artist and calligrapher.
Scholars have detected some 6,000 separate hieroglyphic characters in use over the
history of Egyptian writing, but it appears that never more than a thousand were in
use during any one period. It still seems a lot to recall, but what was lost in
efficiency was more than made up for in the beauty and richness of the texts.
Writing was meant to impress the eye with the vastness of creating itself. Each
symbol or glyph - the flowering reed (pronounced like V), the owl ("m"), the quail
chick ("w"), etcetera - was a tiny work of art. Manuscripts were compiled with an
[392]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
eye to the overall design. Egyptologists have noticed that the glyphs that constitute
individual words were sometimes shuffled to make the text more pleasing to the
eye with little regard for sound or sense.
www.ZabanExam.com
[393]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The Extinction of Moa
Between 80 and 85 million years ago, Gondwanaland, a giant continent made up of
what today is Africa, Antarctica, Australia, and South America, broke up, thus
causing what is now New Zealand to become separated from the larger landmass.
After the separation, any creature unable to cross a considerable distance of ocean
could not migrate to New Zealand. Snakes and most mammals evolved after the
separation. Thus there are no New Zealand snakes, and bats, which flew there, and
seals, which swam there, were the only mammals on New Zealand when
Polynesian settlers (the Maori) arrived there about a thousand years ago.
When the Maori arrived in New Zealand, they encountered birds that had been
evolving for 80 million years without the presence of mammalian predators. The
most striking of these animals must have been moa. Now extinct, moa were
gigantic wingless birds that stood as much as 10 feet (3 meters) tall and weighed as
much as 550 pounds (250 kilograms). They are known from a diverse array of
remains including eggshells, eggs, a few mummified carcasses, vast numbers of
bones, and some older fossilized bone. The species of moa that
are currently recognized occupied ecological niches customarily filled elsewhere
by large mammalian browsing herbivores. They may have had relatively low
reproductive rates; apparently, they usually laid only one egg at a time.
It seems possible that when Captain James Cook first visited New Zealand in 1769,
moa (or at least one of the moa species) may have still survived in the remote areas
in the western part of New Zealand's South Island. If so, these individuals would
have been the last of their kind. Climatic conditions in New Zealand appear to have
been relatively stable over the period during which moa became extinct. Different
factors could have worked in concert to account for their abrupt disappearance.
[394]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Vegetation was considerably altered by the Maori occupation of New Zealand, a
change not easily explained by climate variation or other possible factors. Forest
and shrubland burning appears to have reduced the prime habitat of many moa
species. However, the main forest burning started around 700 years ago, after what
current archaeological evidence indicates was the most intensive stage of moa
hunting. While there appears to have been extensive burning on the east side of
New Zealand's South Island, large forest tracts remained in the most southern part
of the island. Because major habitat destruction seems to have occurred after moa
populations already were depleted, and because some habitat that could have
sheltered moa populations remained, it would seem that other factors were also at
work in the extinction of these birds.
For South Island, human predation appears to have been a significant factor in the
depletion of the population of moa. At one excavated Maori site, moa remains
filled six railway cars. The density of Maori settlements and artifacts increased
substantially at the time of the most intensive moa hunting (900 to 600 years ago).
This period was followed by a time of decline in the Maori population and a
societal transition to smaller, less numerous settlements. The apparent decline fits
the pattern expected as a consequence of the Maori's overexploitation of moa.
Finally, the Maori introduced the Polynesian rat and the dog to New Zealand. The
actions of these potential nest predators could have reduced moa populations
without leaving much direct evidence. The Maori may have also inadvertently
brought pests and disease organisms in fowls, which could have crossed over to
eradicate moa populations. The possibility of analyzing ancient DNA to identify
past diseases of extinct animals is being explored. However, evidence of such
diseases is difficult to determine directly from paleoecological or archaeological
remains. For these reasons, it is hard to determine the likelihood that introduced
[395]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
disease organisms were a cause of the decline of moa, but they
are potentially significant.
While the last of these possible causes remains speculative, define clues exist for
the action of the first two causes. The story of moa species and their demise raises
ecological issues on the vulnerability of species to human-caused changes -
including altered vegetative cover of the landscape, change in the physical
environment, and modification of the flora and fauna of a region by eliminating
some species and introducing others.
[396]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Forest Fire Suppression
Forest fires have recently increased in intensity and extent in some forest types
throughout the western United States. This recent increase in fires has resulted
partly from climate change (the recent trend toward hot, dry summers) and partly
from human activities, for complicated reasons that foresters came increasingly to
understand about 30 years ago but whose relative importance is still debated. One
factor is the direct effect of logging, which often turns a forest into
something approximating a huge pile of kindling (wood for burning): the ground in
a logged forest may remain covered with branches and treetops, left behind when
the valuable trunks are carted away; a dense growth of new vegetation springs up,
further increasing the forest's fuel loads; and the trees logged and removed are of
course the biggest and most fire-resistant individuals, leaving behind smaller and
more flammable trees.
Another factor is that the United States Forest Service in the first decade of the
1900s adopted the policy of fire suppression (attempting to put out forest fires) for
the obvious reason that it did not want valuable timber to go up in smoke, or
people's homes and lives to be threatened. The Forest Service's announced goal
became "Put out every forest fire by 10:00 A. M. on the morning after the day
when it is first reported."Firefighters became much more successful at achieving
that goal after 1945, thanks to improved firefighting technology. For a few decades
the amount of land burnt annually decreased by 80 percent. That happy situation
began to change in the 1980s, due to the increasing frequency of large forest fires
that were essentially impossible to extinguish unless rain and low winds combined
to help. People began to realize that the United States federal government's fire-
suppression policy was contributing to those big fires and that natural fires caused
[397]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
by lightning had previously played an important role in maintaining forest
structure.
The natural role of fire varies with altitude, tree species, and forest type. To make
Montana's low-altitude ponderosa pine forest as an example, historical records,
plus counts of annual tree rings and datable fire scars on tree stumps, demonstrated
that a ponderosa pine forest experiences a lightning-lit fire about once a decade
under natural conditions (i.e.., before fire suppression began around 1910 and
became effective after 1945). The mature ponderosa trees have bark two inches
thick and are relatively resistant to fire, which instead burns out the understory -
the lower layer - of fire-sensitive Douglas fir seedlings that have grown up since
the previous fire. But after only a decade's growth until the next fire, those young
seedling plants are still too low for fire to spread from them into the crowns of the
ponderosa pine trees. Hence the fire remains confined to ground and understory.
As a result, many natural ponderosa pine forests have a parklike appearance, with
low fuel loads, big trees spaced apart, and a relatively clear understory.
However, loggers concentrated on removing those big, old, valuable, fire-resistant
ponderosa pines, while fire suppression for decades let the understory fill up with
Douglas fir saplings that would in turn become valuable when full-grown. Tree
densities increased from 30 to 200 trees per acre, the forest's fuel load increased by
a factor of 6, and the government repeatedly failed to appropriate money to thin out
the saplings. When a fire finally does start in a sapling-choked forest, whether due
to lightning or human carelessness or (regrettably often) intentional arson, the
dense, tall saplings (young trees) may become a ladder that allows the fire to jump
into the crowns of the trees. The outcome is sometimes an unstoppable inferno.
Foresters now identify the biggest problem in managing Western forests as what to
do with those increased fuel loads that built up during the previous half century of
[398]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
effective fire suppression. In the wetter eastern United States, dead trees rot away
more quickly than in the drier West, where more dead trees persist like giant
matchsticks. In an ideal world, the Forest Service would manage and restore the
forests, thin them out, and remove the dense understory by cutting or by controlled
small fires. But no politician or voter wants to spend what it would cost to do that.
[399]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 40
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[400]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Ancient Athens
One of the most important changes in Greece during the period from 800 B.C. to
500 B.C. was the rise of the polis, or city-state, and each polis developed a system
of government that was appropriate to its circumstances. The problems that were
faced and solved in Athens were the sharing of political power between the
established aristocracy and the emerging other classes, and the adjustment of
aristocratic ways of life to the ways of life of the new polis. It was the harmonious
blending of all of these elements that was to produce the classical culture of
Athens.
Entering the polis age, Athens had the traditional institutions of other Greek
protodemocratic states: an assembly of adult males, an aristocratic council, and
annually elected officials. Within this traditional framework the Athenians,
between 600 B.C. and 450 B.C., evolved what Greeks regarded as a fully fledged
democratic constitution, though the right to vote was given to fewer groups of
people than is seen in modern times.
The first steps toward change were taken by Solon in 594 B.C., when he broke the
aristocracy's stranglehold on elected offices by establishing wealth rather than birth
as the basis of office holding, abolishing the economic obligations of ordinary
Athenians to the aristocracy, and allowing the assembly (of which all citizens were
equal members) to overrule the decisions of local courts in certain cases. The
strength of the Athenian aristocracy was further weakened during the rest of the
century by the rise of a type of government known as a tyranny, which is a form of
interim rule by a popular strongman (not rule by a ruthless dictator as the modern
use of the term suggests to us). The Peisistratids, as the succession of tyrants were
called (after the founder of the dynasty, Peisistratos), strengthened Athenian
[401]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
central administration at the expense of the aristocracy by appointing judges
throughout the region, producing Athens’ first national coinage, and adding
and embellishing festivals that tended to focus attention on Athens rather than on
local villages of the surrounding region. By the end of the century, the time was
ripe for more change: the tyrants were driven out, and in 508 B.C. a new reformer,
Cleisthenes, gave final form to the developments reducing aristocratic control
already under way.
Cleisthenes' principal contribution to the creation of democracy at Athens was to
complete the long process of weakening family and clan structures, especially
among the aristocrats, and to set in their place locality-based corporations called
demes, which became the point of entry for all civic and most religious life in
Athens. Out of the demes were created 10 artificial tribes of roughly equal
population. From the demes, by either election or selection, came 500 members of
a new council, 6,000 jurors for the courts, 10 generals, and hundreds of
commissioners. The assembly was sovereign in all matters but in practice
delegated its power to subordinate bodies such as the council, which prepared the
agenda for the meetings of the assembly, and courts, which took care of most
judicial matters. Various committees acted as an executive branch, implementing
policies of the assembly and supervising, for instance, the food and water supplies
and public buildings. This wide-scale participation by the citizenry in the
government distinguished the democratic form of the Athenian polis from other
less liberal forms.
The effect of Cleisthenes’ reforms was to establish the superiority of the Athenian
community as a whole over local institutions without destroying them. National
politics rather than local or deme politics became the focal point. At the same time,
entry into national politics began at the deme level and gave local loyalty a new
[402]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
focus: Athens itself. Over the next two centuries the implications of Cleisthenes’
reforms were fully exploited.
During the fifth century B.C. the council of 500 was extremely influential in
shaping policy. In the next century, however, it was the mature assembly that took
on decision-making responsibility. By any measure other than that of the
aristocrats, who had been upstaged by the supposedly inferior "people", the
Athenian democracy was a stunningsuccess. Never before, or since, have so many
people been involved in the serious business of self-governance. It was precisely
this opportunity to participate in public life that provided a stimulus for the brilliant
unfolding of classical Greek culture.
www.ZabanExam.com
[403]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Latitude and Biodiversity
When we look at the way in which biodiversity (biological diversity)
is distributed over the land surface of the planet, we find that it is far from even.
The tropics contain many more species overall than an equivalent area at the higher
latitudes. This seems to be true for many different groups of animals and plants.
Why is it that higher latitudes have lower diversities than the tropics?Perhaps it is
simply a matter of land area. The tropics contain a larger surface area of land than
higher latitudes - a fact that is not always evident when we examine commonly
used projections of Earth’s curved surface, since this tends to exaggerate the areas
of land in the higher latitudes - and some biogeographers regard the differences in
diversity as a reflection of this effect. But an analysis of the data by biologist Klaus
Rohde does not support this explanation. Although area may contribute to
biodiversity, it is certainly not the whole story; otherwise, large landmasses would
always be richer in species.
Productivity seems to be involved instead, though perhaps its influence is indirect.
Where conditions are most suitable for plant growth - that is, where temperatures
are relatively high and uniform and where there is an ample supply of water - one
usually finds large masses of vegetation. This leads to a complex structure in the
layers of plant material In a tropical rain forest, for example, a very large quantity
of plant material builds up above the surface of the ground. There is also a large
mass of material, developed below ground as root tissues, but this is less apparent.
Careful analysis of the above ground material reveals that it is arranged in a series
of layers, the precise number of layers varying with age and the nature of the
forest. The arrangement of the biological mass ("biomass") of the vegetation into
layered forms is termed its “structure” (as opposed to its “composition”, which
[404]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
refers to the species of organisms forming the community). Structure is essentially
the architecture of vegetation, and as in the case of tropical forests, it can be
extremely complicated. In a mature floodplain tropical forest in the Amazon River
basin, the canopy (the uppermost layers of a forest, formed by the crowns of trees)
takes on a stratified structure. There are three clear peaks in leaf cover at heights of
approximately 3, 6, and 30 meters above the ground; and the very highest layer, at
50 meters, corresponds to the very tall trees that stand free of the main canopy and
form an open layer of their own. So, such a forest contains essentially four layers
of canopy. Forests in temperate lands often have just two canopy layers, so they
have much less complex architecture.
Structure has a strong influence on the animal life inhabiting a site. It forms the
spatial environment within which an animal feeds, moves around shelters, lives,
and breeds. It even affects the climate on a very local level (the "microclimate") by
influencing light intensity, humidity, and both the range and extremes of
temperature. An area of grassland vegetation with very simple structure, for
example, has a very different microclimate at the ground level from that
experienced in the upper canopy. Wind speeds are lower, temperatures are lower
during the day (but warmer at night), and the relative humidity is much greater
near the ground. The complexity of the microclimate is closely related to the
complexity of structure in vegetation, and generally speaking, the more complex
the structure of vegetation, the more species of animal are able to make a living
there. The high plant biomass of the tropics leads to a greater spatial complexity in
the environment, and this leads to a higher potential for diversity in the living
things that can occupy a region. The climates of the higher latitudes are generally
less favorable for the accumulation of large quantities of biomass; hence, the
structure of vegetation is simpler and the animal diversity is consequently lower.
[405]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Amphibian Thermoregulation
In contrast to mammals and birds, amphibians are unable to produce thermal
energy through their metabolic activity, which would allow them to regulate their
body temperature independent of the surrounding or ambient temperature.
However, the idea that amphibians have no control whatsoever over their body
temperature has been proven false because their body temperature does not always
correspond to the surrounding temperature. While amphibians are poor
thermoregulators, they do exercise control over their body temperature to a limited
degree.
Physiological adaptations can assist amphibians in colonizing habitats where
extreme conditions prevail. The tolerance range in body temperature represents the
range of temperatures within which a species can survive. One species of North
American newt is still active when temperatures drop to -2°C while one South
American frog feels comfortable even when temperatures measured to 41°C - the
highest body temperature measured in a free-ranging amphibian. Recently it has
been shown that some North American frog and toad species can survive up to five
days with a body temperature of -6°C with approximately one-third of their body
fluids frozen. The other tissues are protected because they contain the frost-
protective agents glycerin or glucose. Additionally, in many species the tolerance
boundaries are flexible and can change as a result of acclimatization (long-term
exposure to particular conditions).
Frog species that remain exposed to the sun despite high diurnal (daytime)
temperatures exhibit some fascinating modifications in the skin structure that
function as morphological adaptations. Most amphibian skin is fully water
permeable and is therefore not a barrier against evaporation or solar radiation. The
[406]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
African savanna frog Hyperolius viridiflavus stores guanine crystals in its skin,
which enable it to better reflect solar radiation, thus providing protection against
overheating. The tree frog Phyllomedusa sauvagei responds to evaporative losses
with gland secretions that provide a greasy film over its entire body that helps
prevent desiccation (dehydration).
However, behavior is by far the most important factor in thermoregulation. The
principal elements in behavioral thermoregulation are basking (heliothermy), heat
exchange with substrates such as rock or earth (thigmothermy), and diurnal and
annual avoidance behaviors, which include moving to shelter during the day for
cooling and hibernating or estivating (reducing activity during cold or hot weather,
respectively). Heliothermy is especially common among frogs and toads: it allows
them to increase their body temperature by more than 10°C. The Andean toad Bufo
spinulosus exposes itself immediately after sunrise on moist ground and attains its
preferred body temperature by this means, long before either ground or air is
correspondingly warmed. A positive side effect of this approach is that it
accelerates the digestion of the prey consumed overnight, thus also accelerating
growth. Thigmothermy is a behavior present in most amphibians, although
pressing against the ground serves a dual purpose: heat absorption by conductivity
and water absorption through the skin. The effect of thigmothermy is especially
evident in the Andean toad during rainfall: its body temperature corresponds to the
temperature of the warm earth and not to the much cooler air temperature.
Avoidance behavior occurs whenever physiological and morphological adaptations
are insufficient to maintain body temperature within the vital range. Nocturnal
activity in amphibians with low tolerance for high ambient temperatures is a
typical thermoregulatory behavior of avoidance. Seasonal avoidance behavior is
extremely important in many amphibians. Species whose habitat lies in the
[407]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
temperate latitudes are confronted by lethal low temperatures in winter, while
species dwelling in semiarid regions are exposed to long dry, hot periods in
summer.
In amphibians hibernation occurs in mud or deep holes away from frost. North of
the Pyrenees Mountains, the natterjack toad offers a good example of hibernation,
passing the winter dug deep into sandy ground. Conversely, natterjacks in southern
Spain remain active during the mild winters common to the region and are instead
forced into inactivity during the dry, hot summer season. Summer estivation also
occurs by burrowing into the ground or hiding in cool, deep rock crevasses to
avoid desiccation and lethal ambient temperature. Amphibians are therefore hardly
at mercy of ambient temperature, since by means of the mechanisms described
above they are more than exercise some control over their body temperature.