21-30
Geothermal Energy
Earth's internal heat, fueled by radioactivity, provides the energy for plate tectonics
and continental drift, mountain building, and earthquakes. It can also be harnessed
to drive electric generators and heat homes. Geothermal energy becomes available
in a practical form when underground heat is transferred by water that is heated as
it passes through a subsurface region of hot rocks (a heat reservoir) that may be
hundreds or thousands of feet deep.The water is usually naturally occurring
groundwater that seeps down along fractures in the rock; less typically, the water is
artificially introduced by being pumped down from the surface.The water is
brought to the surface, as a liquid or steam, through holes drilled for the purpose.
By far the most abundant form of geothermal energy occurs at the relatively low
temperatures of 80° to 180° centigrade.Water circulated through heat reservoirs in
this temperature range is able to extract enough heat to warm residential,
commercial, and industrial spaces. More than 20,000 apartments in France are now
heated by warm underground water drawn from a heat reservoir in a geologic
structure near Paris called the Paris Basin. Iceland sits on a volcanic structure
known as the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. Reykjavik, the capital of Iceland, is entirely
heated by geothermal energy derived from volcanic heat.
Geothermal reservoirs with temperatures above 180° centigrade are useful for
generating electricity. They occur primarily in regions of recent volcanic activity
as hot, dry rock; natural hot water; or natural steam. The latter two sources are
limited to those few areas where surface water seeps down through underground
faults or fractures to reach deep rocks heated by the recent activity of molten rock
material. The world's largest supply of natural steam occurs at The Geysers, 120
kilometers north of San Francisco, California. In the 1990s enough electricity to
[212]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
meet about half the needs of San Francisco was being generated there. This facility
was then in its third decade of production and was beginning to show signs of
decline, perhaps because of over development. By the late 1990s some 70
geothermal electric-generating plants were in operation in California, Utah,
Nevada, and Hawaii, generating enough power to supply about a million people.
Eighteen countries now generate electricity using geothermal heat.
Extracting heat from very hot, dry rocks presents a more difficult problem: the
rocks must be fractured to permit the circulation of water, and the water must be
provided artificially. The rocks are fractured by water pumped down at very high
pressures. Experiments are under way to develop technologies for exploiting this
resource.
Like most other energy sources, geothermal energy presents some environmental
problems. The surface of the ground can sink if hot groundwater is withdrawn
without being replaced. In addition, water heated geothermally can contain salts
and toxic materials dissolved from the hot rock. These waters present a disposal
problem if they are not returned to the ground from which they were removed.
The contribution of geothermal energy to the world's energy future is difficult to
estimate. Geothermal energy is in a sense not renewable, because in most cases the
heat would be drawn out of a reservoir much more rapidly than it would be
replaced by the very slow geological processes by which heat flows through solid
rock into a heat reservoir. However, in many places (for example, California,
Hawaii, the Philippines, Japan, Mexico, the rift valleys of Africa)the resource is
potentially so large that its future will depend on the economics of production. At
present, we can make efficient use of only naturally occurring hot water or steam
deposits. Although the potential is enormous, it is likely that in the near future
geothermal energy can make important local contributions only where the resource
[213]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
is close to the user and the economics are favorable, as they are in California, New
Zealand, and Iceland. Geothermal energy probably will not make large-scale
contributions to the world energy budget until well into the twenty-first century, if
ever.
www.ZabanExam.com
[214]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The Origins of Agriculture
How did it come about that farming developed independently in a number of world
centers (the Southeast Asian mainland, Southwest Asia, Central America, lowland
and highland South America, and equatorial Africa) at more or less the same time?
Agriculture developed slowly among populations that had an extensive knowledge
of plants and animals. Changing from hunting and gathering to agriculture had no
immediate advantages.To start with, it forced the population to abandon the
nomad's life and became sedentary, to develop methods of storage and, often,
systems of irrigation.While hunter-gatherers always had the option of moving
elsewhere when the resources were exhausted, this became more difficult with
farming. Furthermore, as the archaeological record shows, the state of health of
agriculturalists was worse than that of their contemporary hunter-gatherers.
Traditionally, it was believed that the transition to agriculture was the result of a
worldwide population crisis. It was argued that once hunter-gatherers had occupied
the whole world, the population started to grow everywhere and food became
scarce; agriculture would have been a solution to this problem. We know, however,
that contemporary hunter-gatherer societies control their population in a variety of
ways. The idea of a world population crisis is therefore unlikely, although
population pressure might have arisen in some areas.
Climatic changes at the end of the glacial period 13,000 years ago have been
proposed to account for the emergence of farming. The temperature increased
dramatically in a short period of time (years rather than centuries), allowing for a
growth of the hunting-gathering population due to the abundance of resources.
There were, however, fluctuations in the climatic conditions, with the
[215]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
consequences that wet conditions were followed by dry ones, so that the
availability of plants and animals oscillated brusquely.
It would appear that the instability of the climatic conditions led populations that
had originally been nomadic to settle down and develop a sedentary style of life,
which led in turn to population growth and to the need to increase the amount of
food available. Farming originated in these conditions. Later on, it became very
difficult to change because of the significant expansion of these populations. It
could be argued, however, that these conditions are not sufficient to explain the
origins of agriculture. Earth had experienced previous periods of climatic change,
and yet agriculture had not been developed.
It is archaeologist Steven Mithen's thesis, brilliantly developed in his book The
Prehistory of the Mind (1996), that approximately 40,000 years ago the human
mind developed cognitive fluidity, that is, the integration of the specializations of
the mind: technical, natural history (geared to understanding the behavior and
distribution of natural resources), social intelligence, and the linguistic capacity.
Cognitive fluidity explains the appearance of art, religion, and sophisticated
speech. Once humans possessed such a mind, they were able to find
an imaginative solution to a situation of severe economic crisis such as the farming
dilemma described earlier. Mithen proposes the existence of four mental elements
to account for the emergence of farming: (1) the ability to develop tools that could
be used intensively to harvest and process plant resources; (2) the tendency to use
plants and animals as the medium to acquire social prestige and power; (3) the
tendency to develop "social relationships" with animals structurally similar to those
developed with people—specifically, the ability to think of animals as people
(anthropomorphism) and of people as animals (totemism); and (4) the tendency to
manipulate plants and animals.
[216]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The fact that some societies domesticated animals and plants, discovered the use of
metal tools, became literate, and developed a state should not make us forget that
others developed pastoralism or horticulture (vegetable gardening) but remained
illiterate and at low levels of productivity; a few entered the modern period as
hunting and gathering societies. It is anthropologically important to inquire into the
conditions that made some societies adopt agriculture while others remained
hunter-gatherers or horticulturalists. However, it should be kept in mind that many
societies that knew of agriculture more or less consciously avoided it. Whether
Mithen's explanation is satisfactory is open to contention, and some authors have
recently emphasized the importance of other factors.
[217]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Autobiographical Memory
Think back to your childhood and try to identify your earliest memory. How old
were you? Most people are not able to recount memories for experiences prior to
the age of three years, a phenomenon called infantile amnesia. The question of why
infantile amnesia occurs has intrigued psychologists for decades, especially in light
of ample evidence that infants and young children can display impressive memory
capabilities. Many find that understanding the general nature of autobiographical
memory, that is, memory for events that have occurred in one's own life, can
provide some important clues to this mystery. Between ages three and four,
children begin to give fairly lengthy and cohesive descriptions of events in their
past. What factors are responsible for this developmental turning point?
Perhaps the explanation goes back to some ideas raised by influential Swiss
psychologist Jean Piaget—namely, that children under age two years represent
events in a qualitatively different form than older children do. According to this
line of thought, the verbal abilities that blossom in the two year old allow events to
be coded in a form radically different from the action-based codes of the infant.
Verbal abilities of one year olds are, in fact, related to their memories for events
one year later. When researchers had one year olds imitate an action sequence one
year after they first saw it, there was correlation between the children's verbal skills
at the time they first saw the event and their success on the later memory task.
However, even children with low verbal skills showed evidence of remembering
the event; thus, memories may be facilitated by but are not dependent on those
verbal skills.
Another suggestion is that before children can talk about past events in their lives,
they need to have a reasonable understanding of the self as a psychological entity.
[218]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The development of an understanding of the self becomes evident between the first
and second years of life and shows rapid elaboration in subsequent years. The
realization that the physical self has continuity in time, according to this
hypothesis, lays the foundation for the emergence of autobiographical memory.
A third possibility is that children will not be able to tell their own "life story" until
they understand something about the general form stories take, that is, the structure
of narratives. Knowledge about narratives arises from social interactions,
particularly the storytelling that children experience from parents and the attempts
parents make to talk with children about past events in their lives. When parents
talk with children about "what we did today" or "last week" or "last year," they
guide the children's formation of a framework for talking about the past. They also
provide children with reminders about the memory and relay the message that
memories are valued as part of the cultural experience. It is interesting to note that
some studies show Caucasian American children have earlier childhood memories
than Korean children do. Furthermore, other studies show that Caucasian
American mother-child pairs talk about past events three times more often than do
Korean mother-child pairs. Thus, the types of social experiences children have do
factor into the development of autobiographical memories.
A final suggestion is that children must begin to develop a "theory of mind"—an
awareness of the concept of mental states (feelings, desires, beliefs, and thoughts),
their own and those of others—before they can talk about their own past memories.
Once children become capable of answering such questions as "What does it mean
to remember?" and "What does it mean to know something?" improvements in
memory seem to occur.
It may be that the developments just described are intertwined with and influence
one another. Talking with parents about the past may enhance the development of
[219]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
the self-concept, for example, as well as help the child understand what it means to
"remember." No doubt the ability to talk about one's past represents memory of a
different level of complexity than simple recognition or recall.
[220]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 22
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[221]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Spartina
Spartina alterniflora, known as cordgrass, is a deciduous, perennial flowering plant
native to the Atlantic coast and the Gulf Coast of the United States. It is the
dominant native species of the lower salt marshes along these coasts, where it
grows in the intertidal zone (the area covered by water some parts of the day and
exposed others).
These natural salt marshes are among the most productive habitats in the marine
environment. Nutrient-rich water is brought to the wetlands during each high tide,
making a high rate of food production possible. As the seaweed and marsh grass
leaves die, bacteria break down the plant material, and insects, small shrimplike
organisms, fiddler crabs, and marsh snails eat the decaying plant tissue, digest it,
and excrete wastes high in nutrients. Numerous insects occupy the marsh, feeding
on living or dead cordgrass tissue, and redwing blackbirds, sparrows, rodents,
rabbits, and deer feed directly on the cordgrass. Each tidal cycle carries plant
material into the offshore water to be used by the subtidal organisms.
Spartina is an exceedingly competitive plant.It spreads primarily by underground
stems; colonies form when pieces of the root system or whole plants float into an
area and take root or when seeds float into a suitable area and germinate.Spartina
establishes itself on substrates ranging from sand and silt to gravel and cobble and
is tolerant of salinities ranging from that of near freshwater (0.05 percent) to that of
salt water (3.5 percent).Because they lack oxygen, marsh sediments are high in
sulfides that are toxic to most plants. Spartina has the ability to take up sulfides and
convert them to sulfate, a form of sulfur that the plant can use; this ability makes it
easier for the grass to colonize marsh environments. Another adaptive advantage is
Spartina’s ability to use carbon dioxide more efficiently than most other plants.
[222]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
These characteristics make Spartina a valuable component of the estuaries where it
occurs naturally. The plant functions as a stabilizer and a sediment trap and as a
nursery area for estuarine fish and shellfish. Once established, a stand of Spartina
begins to trap sediment, changing the substrate elevation, and eventually the stand
evolves into a high marsh system where Spartina is gradually displaced by higher-
elevation, brackish-water species. As elevation increases, narrow, deep channels of
water form throughout the marsh. Along the east coast Spartina is considered
valuable for its ability to prevent erosion and marshland deterioration; it is also
used for coastal restoration projects and the creation of new wetland sites.
Spartina was transported to Washington State in packing materials for oysters
transplanted from the east coast in 1894. Leaving its insect predators behind, the
cordgrass has been spreading slowly and steadily along Washington’s tidal
estuaries on the west coast, crowding out the native plants and drastically altering
the landscape by trapping sediment. Spartina modifies tidal mudflats, turning them
into high marshes inhospitable to the many fish and waterfowl that depend on the
mudflats. It is already hampering the oyster harvest and the Dungeness crab
fishery, and it interferes with the recreational use of beaches and waterfronts.
Spartina has been transplanted to England and to New Zealand for land
reclamation and shoreline stabilization. In New Zealand the plant has spread
rapidly, changing mudflats with marshy fringes to extensive salt meadows and
reducing the number and kinds of birds and animals that use the marsh.
Efforts to control Spartina outside its natural environment have included burning,
flooding, shading plants with black canvas or plastic, smothering the plants with
dredged materials or clay, applying herbicide, and mowing repeatedly. Little
success has been reported in New Zealand and England; Washington State’s
management program has tried many of these methods and is presently using the
[223]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
herbicide glyphosphate to control its spread. Work has begun to determine the
feasibility of using insects as biological controls, but effective biological controls
are considered years away. Even with a massive effort, it is doubtful that complete
eradication of Spartina from nonnative habitats is possible, for it has become an
integral part of these shorelines and estuaries during the last 100 to 200 years.
www.ZabanExam.com
[224]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The Birth of Photography
Perceptions of the visible world were greatly altered by the invention of
photography in the middle of the nineteenth century. In particular, and quite
logically, the art of painting was forever changed, though not always in the ways
one might have expected. The realistic and naturalistic painters of the mid- and
late-nineteenth century were all intently aware of photography—as a thing to use,
to learn from, and react to.
Unlike most major inventions, photography had been long and impatiently
awaited. The images produced by the camera obscura, a boxlike device that used a
pinhole or lens to throw an image onto a ground-glass screen or a piece of white
paper, were already familiar—the device had been much employed by
topographical artists like the Italian painter Canaletto in his detailed views of the
city of Venice. What was lacking was a way of giving such images permanent
form. This was finally achieved by Louis Daguerre (1787-1851), who perfected a
way of fixing them on a silvered copper plate. His discovery, the "daguerreotype,"
was announced in 1839.
A second and very different process was patented by the British inventor William
Henry Talbot (1800-1877) in 1841. Talbot's "calotype" was the first negative-to-
positive process and the direct ancestor of the modern photograph. The calotype
was revolutionary in its use of chemically treated paper in which areas hit by light
became dark in tone, producing a negative image. This "negative," as Talbot called
it, could then be used to print multiple positive images on another piece of treated
paper.
The two processes produced very different results. The daguerreotype was a
unique image that reproduced what was in front of the camera lens in minute,
[225]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
unselective detail and could not be duplicated. The calotype could be made in
series, and was thus the equivalent of an etching or an engraving. Its general
effect was soft edged and tonal.
One of the things that most impressed the original audience for photography was
the idea of authenticity. Nature now seemed able to speak for itself, with a
minimum of interference. The title Talbot chose for his book, The Pencil of Nature
(the first part of which was published in 1844), reflected this feeling. Artists were
fascinated by photography because it offered a way of examining the world in
much greater detail. They were also afraid of it, because it seemed likely to make
their own efforts unnecessary.
Photography did indeed make certain kinds of painting obsolete—the
daguerreotype virtually did away with the portrait miniature. It also made the
whole business of making and owning images democratic. Portraiture, once a
luxury for the privileged few, was suddenly well within the reach of many more
people.
In the long term, photography's impact on the visual arts was far from
simple. Because the medium was so prolific, in the sense that it was possible to
produce a multitude of images very cheaply, it was soon treated as the poor
relation of fine art, rather than its destined successor. Even those artists who were
most dependent on photography became reluctant to admit that they made use of it,
in case this compromised their professional standing.
The rapid technical development of photography—the introduction of lighter and
simpler equipment, and of new emulsions that coated photographic plates, film,
and paper and enabled images to be made at much faster speeds—had
some unanticipated consequences. Scientific experiments made by photographers
[226]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
such as Eadweard Muybridge (1830-1904) and Etienne-Jules Marey (1830-1904)
demonstrated that the movements of both humans and animals differed widely
from the way they had been traditionally represented in art. Artists, often
reluctantly, were forced to accept the evidence provided by the camera. The new
candid photography—unposed pictures that were made when the subjects were
unaware that their pictures were being taken—confirmed these scientific results,
and at the same time, thanks to the radical cropping (trimming) of images that the
camera often imposed, suggested new compositional formats.
The accidental effects obtained by candid photographers were soon being copied
by artists such as the French painter Degas.
[227]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The Allende Meteorite
Sometime after midnight on February 8,1969, a large, bright meteor entered Earth's
atmosphere and broke into thousands of pieces, plummeted to the ground, and
scattered over an area 50 miles long and 10 miles wide in the state of Chihuahua in
Mexico. The first meteorite from this fall was found in the village of Pueblito de
Allende. Altogether, roughly two tons of meteorite fragments were recovered, all
of which bear the name Allende for the location of the first discovery.
Individual specimens of Allende are covered with a black, glassy crust that formed
when their exteriors melted as they were slowed by Earth's atmosphere. When
broken open, Allende stones are revealed to contain an assortment of small,
distinctive objects, spherical or irregular in shape and embedded in a dark gray
matrix (binding material), which were once constituents of the solar nebula—the
interstellar cloud of gas and dust out of which our solar system was formed.
The Allende meteorite is classified as a chondrite. Chondrites take their name from
the Greek word chondros—meaning "seed"—an allusion to their appearance as
rocks containing tiny seeds. These seeds are actually chondrules: millimeter-sized
melted droplets of silicate material that were cooled into spheres of glass and
crystal. A few chondrules contain grains that survived the melting event, so
these enigmaticchondrules must have formed when compact masses of nebular
dust were fused at high temperatures—approaching 1,700 degrees Celsius—and
then cooled before these surviving grains could melt. Study of the textures of
chondrules confirms that they cooled rather quickly, in times measured in minutes
or hours, so the heating events that formed them must have been localized. It
seems very unlikely that large portions of the nebula were heated to such extreme
temperatures, and huge nebula areas could not possibly have lost heat so fast.
[228]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Chondrules must have been melted in small pockets of the nebula that were able to
lose heat rapidly. The origin of these peculiar glassy spheres remains an enigma.
Equally perplexing constituents of Allende are the refractory inclusions: irregular
white masses that tend to be larger than chondrules.They are composed of minerals
uncommon on Earth, all rich in calcium, aluminum, and titanium, the most
refractory (resistant to melting) of the major elements in the nebula.The same
minerals that occur in refractory inclusions are believed to be the earliest-formed
substances to have condensed out of the solar nebula.However, studies of the
textures of inclusions reveal that the order in which the minerals appeared in the
inclusions varies from inclusion to inclusion, and often does not match the
theoretical condensation sequence for those metals.
Chondrules and inclusions in Allende are held together by the chondrite matrix, a
mixture of fine-grained, mostly silicate minerals that also includes grains of iron
metal and iron sulfide. At one time it was thought that these matrix grains might
be pristine nebular dust, the sort of stuff from which chondrules and inclusions
were made. However, detailed studies of the chondrite matrix suggest that much of
it, too, has been formed by condensation or melting in the nebula, although minute
amounts of surviving interstellar dust are mixed with the processed materials.
All these diverse constituents are aggregated together to form chondritic
meteorites, like Allende, that have chemical compositions much like that of the
Sun. To compare the compositions of a meteorite and the Sun, it is necessary that
we use ratios of elements rather than simply the abundances of atoms. After all, the
Sun has many more atoms of any element, say iron, than does a meteorite
specimen, but the ratios of iron to silicon in the two kinds of matter might be
comparable. The compositional similarity is striking. The major difference is that
Allende is depleted in the most volatile elements, like hydrogen, carbon, oxygen,
[229]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
nitrogen, and the noble gases, relative to the Sun. These are the elements that tend
to form gases even at very low temperatures. We might think of chondrites as
samples of distilled Sun, a sort of solar sludge from which only gases have been
removed. Since practically all the solar system's mass resides in the Sun, this
similarity in chemistry means that chondrites have average solar system
composition, except for the most volatile elements; they are truly lumps of nebular
matter, probably similar in composition to the matter from which planets were
assembled.
[230]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 23
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[231]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Urban Climates
The city is an extraordinary processor of mass and energy and has its own
metabolism. A daily input of water, food, and energy of various kinds is matched
by an output of sewage, solid waste, air pollutants, energy, and materials that have
been transformed in some way. The quantities involved are enormous. Many
aspects of this energy use affect the atmosphere of a city, particularly in the
production of heat.
In winter the heat produced by a city can equal or surpass the amount of heat
available from the Sun. All the heat that warms a building eventually transfers to
the surrounding air, a process that is quickest where houses are poorly insulated.
But an automobile produces enough heat to warm an average house in winter, and
if a house were perfectly insulated, one adult could also produce more than enough
heat to warm it. Therefore, even without any industrial production of heat, an
urban area tends to be warmer than the countryside that surrounds it.
The burning of fuel, such as by cars, is not the only source of this increased heat.
Two other factors contribute to the higher overall temperature in cities. The first is
the heat capacity of the materials that constitute the city, which is typically
dominated by concrete and asphalt. During the day, heat from the Sun can be
conducted into these materials and stored—to be released at night. But in the
countryside materials have a significantly lower heat capacity because a vegetative
blanket prevents heat from easily flowing into and out of the ground. The second
factor is that radiant heat coming into the city from the Sun is trapped in two ways:
(1) by a continuing series of reflection among the numerous vertical surfaces that
buildings present and (2) by the dust dome, the cloudlike layer of polluted air that
most cities produce. Shortwave radiation from the Sun passes through the pollution
[232]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
dome more easily than outgoing longwave radiation does; the latter is absorbed by
the gaseous pollutants of the dome and reradiated back to the urban surface.
Cities, then, are warmer than the surrounding rural areas, and together they
produce a phenomenon known as the urban heat island. Heat islands develop best
under particular conditions associated with light winds, but they can form almost
any time.The precise configuration of a heat island depends on several factors. For
example, the wind can make a heat island stretch in the direction it blows.When a
heat island is well developed, variations can be extreme; in winter, busy streets in
cities can be 1.7℃ warmer than the side streets.Areas near traffic lights can be
similarly warmer than the areas between them because of the effect of cars
standing in traffic instead of moving. The maximum differences in temperature
between neighboring urban and rural environments is called the heat-island
intensity for that region. In general, the larger the city, the greater its heat-island
intensity. The actual level of intensity depends on such factors as the physical
layout, population density, and productive activities of a metropolis.
The surface-atmosphere relationships inside metropolitan areas produce a number
of climatic peculiarities. For one thing, the presence or absence of moisture is
affected by the special qualities of the urban surface. With much of the built-up
landscape impenetrable by water, even gentle rain runs off almost immediately
from rooftops, streets, and parking lots. Thus, city surfaces, as well as the air above
them, tend to be drier between episodes of rain; with little water available for the
cooling process of evaporation, relative humidities are usually lower. Wind
movements are also modified in cities because buildings increase the friction on air
flowing around them. This friction tends to slow the speed of winds, making them
far less efficient at dispersing pollutants. On the other hand, air turbulence
increases because of the effect of skyscrapers on airflow. Rainfall is also increased
[233]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
in cities. The cause appears to be in part greater turbulence in the urban atmosphere
as hot air rises from the built-up surface.
www.ZabanExam.com
[234]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Seventeenth-Century Dutch Agriculture
Agriculture and fishing formed the primary sector of the economy in the
Netherlands in the seventeenth century. Dutch agriculture was modernized and
commercialized new crops and agricultural techniques raised levels of production
so that they were in line with market demands, and cheap grain was imported
annually from the Baltic region in large quantities. According to estimates, about
120,000 tons of imported grain fed about 600,000 people: that is about a third of
the Dutch population. Importing the grain, which would have been expensive and
time consuming for the Dutch to have produced themselves, kept the price of grain
low and thus stimulated individual demand for other foodstuffs and consumer
goods.
Apart from this, being able to give up labor-intensive grain production freed both
the land and the workforce for more productive agricultural divisions. The peasants
specialized in livestock husbandry and dairy farming as well as in cultivating
industrial crops and fodder crops: flax, madder, and rape were grown, as were
tobacco, hops, and turnips. These products were bought mostly by urban
businesses. There was also a demand among urban consumers for dairy products
such as butter and cheese, which, in the sixteenth century, had become more
expensive than grain. The high prices encouraged the peasants to improve their
animal husbandry techniques; for example, they began feeding their animals
indoors in order to raise the milk yield of their cows.
In addition to dairy farming and cultivating industrial crops, a third sector of the
Dutch economy reflected the way in which agriculture was being modernized-
horticulture. In the sixteenth century, fruit and vegetables were to be found only in
gardens belonging to wealthy people.This changed in the early part of the
[235]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
seventeenth century when horticulture became accepted as an agricultural
sector.Whole villages began to cultivate fruit and vegetables.The produce was then
transported by water to markets in the cities, where the consumption of fruit and
vegetables was no longer restricted to the wealthy
As the demand for agricultural produce from both consumers and industry
increased, agricultural land became more valuable and people tried to work the
available land more intensively and to reclaim more land from wetlands and lakes.
In order to increase production on existing land, the peasants made more use of
crop rotation and, in particular, began to apply animal waste to the soil regularly,
rather than leaving the fertilization process up to the grazing livestock. For the first
time industrial waste, such as ash from the soap-boilers, was collected in the cities
and sold in the country as artificial fertilizer. The increased yield and price of land
justified reclaiming and draining even more land.
The Dutch battle against the sea is legendary. Noorderkwartier in Holland, with its
numerous lakes and stretches of water, was particularly suitable for land
reclamation and one of the biggest projects undertaken there was the draining of
the Beemster lake which began in 1608. The richest merchants in Amsterdam
contributed money to reclaim a good 7,100 hectares of land. Forty-three windmills
powered the drainage pumps so that they were able to lease the reclamation to
farmers as early as 1612, with the investors receiving annual leasing payments at
an interest rate of 17 percent. Land reclamation continued, and between 1590 and
1665, almost 100,000 hectares were reclaimed from the wetland areas of Holland,
Zeeland, and Friesland. However, land reclamation decreased significantly after
the middle of the seventeenth century because the price of agricultural products
began to fall, making land reclamation far less profitable in the second part of the
century.
[236]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Dutch agriculture was finally affected by the general agricultural crisis in Europe
during the last two decades of the seventeenth century. However, what
is astonishing about this is not that Dutch agriculture was affected by critical
phenomena such as a decrease in sales and production, but the fact that the crisis
appeared only relatively late in Dutch agriculture. In Europe as a whole, the
exceptional reduction in the population and the related fall in demand for grain
since the beginning of the seventeenth century had caused the price of agricultural
products to fall. Dutch peasants were able to remain unaffected by this crisis for a
long time because they had specialized in dairy farming industrial crops, and
horticulture. However, toward the end of the seventeenth century, they too were
overtaken by the general agricultural crisis.
[237]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Rock Art of the Australia Aborigines
Ever since European first explored Australia, people have been trying to
understand the ancient rock drawings and cavings created by the Aborigines, the
original inhabitants of the continent. Early in the nineteenth century, encounters
with Aboriginal rock art tended to be infrequent and open to speculative
interpretation, but since the late nineteenth century, awareness of the extent and
variety of Australian rock art has been growing. In the latter decades of the
twentieth century there were intensified efforts to understand and record the
abundance of Australian rock art.
The systematic study of this art is a relatively new discipline in Australia. Over the
past four decades new discoveries have steadily added to the body of knowledge.
The most significant data have come from a concentration on three major
questions. First, what is the age of Australian rock art? Second, what is its stylistic
organization and is it possible to discern a sequence or a pattern of development
between styles? Third, is it possible to interpret accurately the subject matter of
ancient rock art, bring to bear all available archaeological techniques and the
knowledge of present-day Aboriginal informants?
The age of Australia’s rock art is constantly being revised, and earlier datings have
been proposed as the result of new discoveries.Currently, reliable scientific
evidence dates the earliest creation of art on rock surfaces in Australia to
somewhere between 30,000 and 50,000 years ago.This in itself is an almost
incomprehensible span of generations, and one that makes Australia’s rock art the
oldest continuous art tradition in the world.
Although the remarkable antiquity of Australia’s rock art is now established, the
sequences and meanings of its images have been widely debated. Since the mid-
[238]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
1970s, a reasonably stable picture has formed of the organization of Australian
rock art. In order to create a sense of structure to this picture, researchers have
relied on a distinction that still underlies the forms of much indigenous visual
culture—a distinction between geometric and figurative elements. Simple
geometric repeated patterns—circles, concentric circles, and lines—constitute the
iconography (characteristic images) of the earliest rock-art sites found across
Australia. The frequency with which certain simple motifs appear in these oldest
sites has led rock-art researchers to adopt a descriptive term—the Panaramitee
style—a label which takes its name from the extensive rock pavements at
Panaramitee North in desert South Australia, which are covered with motifs
pecked into the surface. Certain features of these engravings lead to the conclusion
that they are of great age—geological changes had clearly happened after the
designs had been made and local Aboriginal informants, when first questioned
about them, seemed to know nothing of their origins. Furthermore, the designs
were covered with “desert varnish,” a glaze that develops on rock surfaces over
thousands of years of exposure to the elements. The simple motifs found at
Panaramitee are common to many rock-art sites across Australia. Indeed, sites with
engravings of geometric shapes are also to be found on the island of Tasmania,
which was separated from the mainland of the continent some 10,000 years ago.
In the 1970s when the study of Australian archaeology was in an exciting phase of
development, with the great antiquity of rock art becoming clear. Lesley Maynard,
the archaeologist who coined the phrase “Panaramitee style,” suggested that a
sequence could be determined for Australian rock art, in which a geometric style
gave way to a simple figurative style (outlines of figures and animals), followed by
a range of complex figurative styles that, unlike the pan-Australian geometric
tradition, tended to be much greater regional diversity. While accepting that this
[239]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
sequence fits the archaeological profile of those sites, which were occupied
continuously over many thousands of years a number of writers have warned that
the underlying assumption of such a sequence—a development from the simple
and the geometric to the complex and naturalistic—obscures the cultural
continuities in Aboriginal Australia, in which geometric symbolism remains
fundamentally important. In this context the simplicity of a geometric motif may
be more apparent than real. Motifs of seeming simplicity can encode complex
meanings in Aboriginal Australia. And has not twentieth-century art shown that
naturalism does not necessarily follow abstraction in some kind of predetermine
sequence?
[240]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 24
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[241]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Lake Water
Where does the water in a lake come from, and how does water leave it? Water
enters a lake from inflowing rivers, from underwater seeps and springs, from
overland flow off the surrounding land, and from rain falling directly on the lake
surface. Water leaves a lake via outflowing rivers, by soaking into the bed of the
lake, and by evaporation. So much is obvious.
The questions become more complicated when actual volumes of water are
considered: how much water enters and leaves by each route? Discovering the
inputs and outputs of rivers is a matter of measuring the discharges of every
inflowing and outflowing stream and river. Then exchanges with the atmosphere
are calculated by finding the difference between the gains from rain, as measured
(rather roughly) by rain gauges, and the losses by evaporation, measured with
models that correct for the other sources of water loss. For the majority of lakes,
certainly those surrounded by forests, input from overland flow is too small to have
a noticeable effect. Changes in lake level not explained by river flows plus
exchanges with the atmosphere must be due to the net difference between what
seeps into the lake from the groundwater and what leaks into the groundwater.
Note the word "net": measuring the actual amounts of groundwater seepage into
the lake and out of the lake is a much more complicated matter than merely
inferring their difference.
Once all this information has been gathered, it becomes possible to judge whether
a lake’s flow is mainly due to its surface inputs and outputs or to its underground
inputs and outputs. If the former are greater, the lake is a surface-water-dominated
lake; if the latter, it is a seepage-dominated lake. Occasionally, common sense tells
you which of these two possibilities applies.For example, a pond in hilly country
[242]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
that maintains a steady water level all through a dry summer in spite of having no
streams flowing into it must obviously be seepage dominated. Conversely, a pond
with a stream flowing in one end and out the other, which dries up when the stream
dries up, is clearly surface water dominated.
By whatever means, a lake is constantly gaining water and losing water: its water
does not just sit there, or, anyway, not for long. This raises the matter of a lake’s
residence time. The residence time is the average length of time that any particular
molecule of water remains in the lake, and it is calculated by dividing the volume
of water in the lake by the rate at which water leaves the lake. The residence time
is an average; the time spent in the lake by a given molecule (if we could follow its
fate) would depend on the route it took: it might flow through as part of the fastest,
most direct current, or it might circle in a backwater for an indefinitely long time.
Residence times vary enormously. They range from a few days for small lakes up
to several hundred years for large ones; Lake Tahoe, in California, has a residence
time of 700 years. The residence times for the Great Lakes of North America,
namely, Lakes Superior, Michigan, Huron, Erie, and Ontario, are, respectively,
190,100,22,2.5, and 6 years. Lake Erie’s is the lowest: although its area is larger
than Lake Ontario’ s, its volume is less than one-third as great because it is so
shallow-less than 20 meters on average.
A given lake's residence time is by no means a fixed quantity. It depends on the
rate at which water enters the lake, and that depends on the rainfall and the
evaporation rate. Climatic change (the result of global warming?) is dramatically
affecting the residence times of some lakes in northwestern Ontario. Canada. In the
period 1970 to 1986, rainfall in the area decreased from 1,000 millimeters to 650
millimeters per annum, while above-average temperatures speeded up the
[243]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
evapotranspiration rate (the rate at which water is lost to the atmosphere through
evaporation and the processes of plant life).
The result has been that the residence time of one of the lakes increased from 5 to
18 years during the study period. The slowing down of water renewal leads to a
chain of further consequences; it causes dissolved chemicals to become
increasingly concentrated, and this, in turn, has a marked effect on all living things
in the lake.
www.ZabanExam.com
[244]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Breathing During Sleep
Of all the physiological differences in human sleep compared with wakefulness
that have been discovered in the last decade, changes in respiratory control are
most dramatic. Not only are there differences in the level of the functioning of
respiratory systems, there are even changes in how they function. Movements of
the rib cage for breathing are reduced during sleep, making the contractions of the
diaphragm more important.Yet because of the physics of lying down, the stomach
applies weight against the diaphragm and makes it more difficult for the diaphragm
to do its job.However, there are many other changes that affect respiration when
asleep.
During wakefulness, breathing is controlled by two interacting systems.The first is
an automatic, metabolic system whose control is centered in the brain stem. It
subconsciously adjusts breathing rate and depth in order to regulate the levels of
carbon dioxide (CO2) and oxygen (O2), and the acid-base ratio in the blood. The
second system is the voluntary, behavioral system. Its control center is based in the
forebrain, and it regulates breathing for use in speech, singing, sighing, and so on.
It is capable of ignoring or overriding the automatic, metabolic system and
produces an irregular pattern of breathing.
During NREM (the phase of sleep in which there is no rapid eye movement)
breathing becomes deeper and more regular, but there is also a decrease in the
breathing rate, resulting in less air being exchanged overall. This occurs because
during NREM sleep the automatic, metabolic system has exclusive control over
breathing and the body uses less oxygen and produces less carbon dioxide. Also,
during sleep the automatic metabolic system is less responsive to carbon dioxide
levels and oxygen levels in the blood. Two things result from these changes in
[245]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
breathing control that occur during sleep. First, there may be a brief cessation or
reduction of breathing when falling asleep as the sleeper waxes and wanes between
sleep and wakefulness and their differing control mechanisms. Second, once sleep
is fully obtained, there is an increase of carbon dioxide and a decrease of oxygen in
the blood that persists during NREM.
But that is not all that changes. During all phases of sleep, several changes in the
air passages have been observed. It takes twice as much effort to breathe during
sleep because of greater resistance to airflow in the airways and changes in the
efficiency of the muscles used for breathing. Some of the muscles that help keep
the upper airway open when breathing tend to become more relaxed during sleep,
especially during REM (the phase of sleep in which there is rapid eye movement).
Without this muscular action, inhaling is like sucking air out of a balloon—the
narrow passages tend to collapse. Also there is a regular cycle of change in
resistance between the two sides of the nose. If something blocks the "good" side,
such as congestion from allergies or a cold, then resistance increases dramatically.
Coupled with these factors is the loss of the complex interactions among the
muscles that can change the route of airflow from nose to mouth.
Other respiratory regulating mechanisms apparently cease functioning during
sleep. For example, during wakefulness there is an immediate, automatic, adaptive
increase in breathing effort when inhaling is made more difficult (such as breathing
through a restrictive face mask). This reflexive adjustment is totally absent during
NREM sleep. Only after several inadequate breaths under such conditions,
resulting in the considerable elevation of carbon dioxide and reduction of oxygen
in the blood, is breathing effort adjusted. Finally, the coughing reflex in reaction to
irritants in the airway produces not a cough during sleep but a cessation of
[246]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
breathing. If the irritation is severe enough, a sleeping person will arouse, clear the
airway, then resume breathing and likely return to sleep.
Additional breathing changes occur during REM sleep that are even more dramatic
than the changes that occur during NREM. The amount of air exchanged is even
lower in REM than NREM because, although breathing is more rapid in REM, it is
also more irregular, with brief episodes of shallow breathing or absence of
breathing. In addition, breathing during REM depends much more on the action of
the diaphragm and much less on rib cage action.
[247]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Moving into Pueblos
In the Mesa Verde area of the ancient North American Southwest, living patterns
changed in the thirteenth century, with large numbers of people moving into large
communal dwellings called pueblos, often constructed at the edges of canyons,
especially on the sides of cliffs. Abandoning small extended-family households to
move into these large pueblos with dozens if not hundreds of other people was
probably traumatic. Few of the cultural traditions and rules that today allow us to
deal with dense populations existed for these people accustomed to household
autonomy and the ability to move around the landscape almost at will.And besides
the awkwardness of having to share walls with neighbors, living in aggregated
pueblos introduced other problems. For people in cliff dwellings, hauling water,
wood, and food to their homes was a major chore.The stress on local resources,
especially in the firewood needed for daily cooking and warmth, was
particularly intense, and conditions in aggregated pueblos were not very hygienic.
Given all the disadvantages of living in aggregated towns, why did people in the
thirteenth century move into these closely packed quarters? For transitions of such
suddenness, archaeologists consider either pull factors (benefits that drew families
together) or push factors (some external threat or crisis that forced people to
aggregate). In this case, push explanations dominate.
Population growth is considered a particularly influential push. After several
generations of population growth, people packed the landscape in densities so high
that communal pueblos may have been a necessary outcome. Around Sand
Canyon, for example, populations grew from 5 -12 people per square kilometer in
the tenth century to as many as 30 - 50 by the 1200s. As densities increased,
domestic architecture became larger, culminating in crowded pueblos. Some
[248]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
scholars expand on this idea by emphasizing a corresponding need for arable land
to feed growing numbers of people: construction of small dams, reservoirs,
terraces, and field houses indicates that farmers were intensifying their efforts
during the 1200s. Competition for good farmland may also have prompted people
to bond together to assert rights over the best fields.
Another important push was the onset of the Little Ice Age, a climatic phenomenon
that led to cooler temperatures in the Northern Hemisphere. Although the height of
the Little Ice Age was still around the corner, some evidence suggests that
temperatures were falling during the thirteenth century. The environmental
changes associated with this transition are not fully understood, but people living
closest to the San Juan Mountains, to the northeast of Mesa Verde, were affected
first. Growing food at these elevations is always difficult because of the short
growing season. As the Little Ice Age progressed, farmers probably moved their
fields to lower elevations, infringing on the lands of other farmers and pushing
people together, thus contributing to the aggregations. Archaeologists identify a
corresponding shift in populations toward the south and west toward Mesa Verde
and away from higher elevations.
In the face of all these pushes, people in the Mesa Verde area had yet another
reason to move into communal villages: the need for greater cooperation. Sharing
and cooperation were almost certainly part of early Puebloan life, even for people
living in largely independent single-household residences scattered across the
landscape. Archaeologists find that even the most isolated residences during the
eleventh and twelfth centuries obtained some pottery, and probably food, from
some distance away, while major ceremonial events were opportunities for sharing
food and crafts. Scholars believe that this cooperation allowed people to contend
with a patchy environment in which precipitation and other resources varied across
[249]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
the landscape: if you produce a lot of food one year, you might trade it for pottery
made by a distant ally who is having difficulty with crops—and the next year, the
flow of goods might go in the opposite direction. But all of this appears to have
changed thirteenth century. Although the climate remained as unpredictable as ever
between one year and the next, it became much less locally diverse. In a bad year
for farming, everyone was equally affected.No longer was it helpful to share
widely. Instead, the most sensible thing would be for neighbors to combine efforts
to produce as much food as possible, and thus aggregated towns were a sensible
arrangement.
[250]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 25
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[251]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The Surface of Mars
The surface of Mars shows a wide range of geologic features, including huge
volcanoes-the largest known in the solar system-and extensive impact cratering.
Three very large volcanoes are found on the Tharsis bulge, an enormous geologic
area near Mars’s equator. Northwest of Tharsis is the largest volcano of all:
Olympus Mons, with a height of 25 kilometers and measuring some 700 kilometers
in diameter at its base. The three large volcanoes on the Tharsis bulge are a little
smaller-a “mere” 18 kilometers high.
None of these volcanoes was formed as a result of collisions between plates of the
Martian crust-there is no plate motion on Mars. Instead, they are shield volcanoes-
volcanoes with broad, sloping slides formed by molten rock. All four
show distinctive lava channels and other flow features similar to those found on
shield volcanoes on Earth. Images of the Martian surface reveal many hundreds of
volcanoes. Most of the largest volcanoes are associated with the Tharsis bulge, but
many smaller ones are found in the northern plains
The great height of Martian volcanoes is a direct consequence of the planet’s low
surface gravity. As lava flows and spreads to form a shield volcano, the volcano’s
eventual height depends on the new mountain’s ability to support its own weight.
The lower the gravity, the lesser the weight and the greater the height of the
mountain. It is no accident that Maxwell Mons on Venus and the Hawaiian shield
volcanoes on Earth rise to about the same height (about 10 kilometers) above their
respective bases-Earth and Venus have similar surface gravity. Mars’s surface
gravity is only 40 percent that of Earth, so volcanoes rise roughly 2.5 times as
high. Are the Martian shield volcanoes still active? Scientists have no direct
evidence for recent or ongoing eruptions, but if these volcanoes were active as
[252]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
recently as 100 million years ago (an estimate of the time of last eruption based on
the extent of impact cratering on their slopes), some of them may still be at least
intermittently active. Millions of years, though, may pass between eruptions.
Another prominent feature of Mars’s surface is cratering. The Mariner spacecraft
found that the surface of Mars, as well as that of its two moons, is pitted with
impact craters formed by meteoroids falling in from space. As on our Moon, the
smaller craters are often filled with surface matter-mostly dust-confirming that
Mars is a dry desert world. However, Martian craters get filled
in considerably faster than their lunar counterparts. On the Moon, ancient craters
less than 100 meters across (corresponding to depths of about 20 meters) have been
obliterated, primarily by meteoritic erosion. On Mars, there are relatively few
craters less than 5 kilometers in diameter. The Martian atmosphere is an efficient
erosive agent, with Martian winds transporting dust from place to place and erasing
surface features much faster than meteoritic impacts alone can obliterate them.
As on the Moon, the extent of large impact cratering (i.e. craters too big to have
been filled in by erosion since they were formed) serves as an age indicator for the
Martian surface. Age estimates ranging from four billion years for Mars’s southern
highlands to a few hundred million years in the youngest volcanic areas were
obtained in this way.
The detailed appearance of Martian impact craters provides an important piece of
information about conditions just below the planet’s surface. Martian craters are
surrounded by ejecta (debris formed as a result of an impact) that looks quite
different from its lunar counterparts. A comparison of the Copernicus crater on the
Moon with the (fairly typical) crater Yuty on Mars demonstrates the differences.
The ejecta surrounding the lunar crater is just what one would expect from an
explosion ejecting a large volume of dust, soil, and boulders. However, the ejecta
[253]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
on Mars gives the distinct impression of a liquid that has splashed or flowed out of
crater.Geologists think that this fluidized ejecta crater indicates that a layer of
permafrost, or water ice, lies just a few meters under the surface.Explosive impacts
heated and liquefied the ice, resulting in the fluid appearance of the ejecta.
[254]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The Decline of Venetian Shipping
In the late thirteenth century, northern Italian cities such as Genoa, Florence, and
Venice began an economic resurgence that made them into the most important
economic centers of Europe. By the seventeenth century, however, other European
powers had taken over, as the Italian cities lost much of their economic might.
This decline can be seen clearly in the changes that affected Venetian shipping and
trade. First, Venic’s intermediary functions in the Adriatic Sea, where it had
dominated the business of shipping for other parties, were lost to direct trading. In
the fifteenth century there was little problem recruiting sailors to row the galleys
(large ships propelled by oars): guilds (business associations) were required to
provide rowers, and through a draft system free citizens served compulsorily when
called for.In the early sixteenth century the shortage of rowers was not serious
because the demand for galleys was limited by a move to round ships (round-
hulled ships with more cargo space), with required fewer rowers.But the shortage
of crews proved to be a greater and greater problem, despite continuous appeal to
Venic’s tradition of maritime greatness.Even though sailors’ wages doubled among
the northern Italian cities from 1550 to 1590, this did not elicit an increased supply.
The problem in shipping extended to the Arsenale, Venice’s huge and powerful
shipyard. Timber ran short, and it was necessary to procure it from farther and
farther away. In ancient Roman times, the Italian peninsula had great forest of fir
preferred for warships, but scarcity was apparent as early as the early fourteenth
century. Arsenale officers first brought timber from the foothills of the Alps, then
from north toward Trieste, and finally from across the Adriatic. Private
shipbuilders were required to buy their oak abroad. As the costs of shipbuilding
[255]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
rose, Venice clung to its outdated standard while the Dutch were innovation in the
lighter and more easily handled ships.
The step from buying foreign timber to buying foreign ships was regarded as a
short one, especially when complaints were heard in the latter sixteenth century
that the standards and traditions of the Arsenale were running down. Work was
stretched out and done poorly. Older workers had been allowed to stop work a half
hour before the regular time, and in 1601 younger works left with them. Merchants
complained that the privileges reserved for Venetian-built and owned ships were
first extended to those Venetians who bought ships from abroad and then to
foreign-built and owned vessels. Historian Frederic Lane observes that after the
loss of ships in battle in the late sixteenth century, the shipbuilding industry no
longer had the capacity to recover that it had displayed at the start of the century.
The conventional explanation for the loss of Venetian dominance in trade is
establishment of the Portuguese direct sea route to the East, replacing the overland
Silk Road from the Black sea and the highly profitable Indian Ocean-caravan-
eastern Mediterranean route to Venice. The Portuguese Vasco da Gama’s Voyage
around southern Africa to India took place at the end of the fifteenth century, and
by 1502 the trans- Abrabian caravan route had been cut off by political unrest.
The Venetian Council finally allowed round ships to enter the trade that was
previously reserved for merchant galleys, thus reducing transport cost by one third.
Prices of spices delivered by ship from the eastern Mediterranean came to equal
those of spices transported by Paortuguese vessels, but the increase in quantity
with both routes in operation drove the price far down. Gradually, Venice’s role as
a storage and distribution center for spices and silk, dyes cotton, and gold decayed,
and by the early seventeenth century Venice had lost its monopoly in markets such
as France and southern Germany.
[256]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Venetian shipping had started to decline from about 1530-before the entry into the
Mediterranean of large volumes of Dutch and British shipping-and was clearly
outclassed by the end of the century. A contemporary of Shakespeare (1564-1616)
observed that the productivity of Italian shipping had declined, compared with that
of the British, because of conservatism and loss of expertise. Moreover, Italian
sailors were deserting and emigrating, and captains, no longer recruited from the
ranks of nobles, were weak on navigations.
[257]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The Evolutionary Origin of Plants
The evolutionary history of plants has been marked by a series of adaptations. The
ancestors of plants were photosynthetic single-celled organisms probably similar to
today's algae. Like modern algae, the organisms that gave rise to
plants presumably lacked true roots, stems, leaves, and complex reproductive
structures such as flowers. All of these features appeared later in the evolutionary
history of plants. Of today’s different groups of algae, green algae are probably the
most similar to ancestral plants. This supposition stems from the close
phylogenetic (natural evolutionary) relationship between the two groups. DNA
comparisons have shown that green algae are plants’ closest living relatives. In
addition, other lines of evidence support the hypothesis that land plants evolved
from ancestral green algae used the same type of chlorophyll and accessory
pigments in photosynthesis as do land plants. This would not be true of red and
brown algae. Green algae store food as starch, as do land plants and have cell walls
made of cellulose, similar in composition to those of land plants. Again, the good
storage and cell wall molecules of red and brown algae are different.
Today green algae live mainly in freshwater, suggesting that their early
evolutionary history may have occurred in freshwater habitats. If so, the green
algae would have been subjected to environmental pressures that resulted in
adaptations that enhanced their potential to give rise to land-dwelling or organisms.
The environmental conditions of freshwater habitats, unlike those of ocean
habitats, are highly variable. Water temperature can fluctuate seasonally or even
daily and changing level of rainfall can lead to fluctuations in the concentration of
chemical in the water or even to period in which the aquatic habitat dries
up. Ancient fresh water green algae must have evolved features that enable them to
[258]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
withstand extremes of temperature and periods of dryness.These adaptations
served their descendant well as they invaded land.
The terrestrial world is green now, but it did not start out that way. When plants
first made the transition ashore more than 400 million years ago, the land was
barren and desolate, inhospitable to life. From a plant’s evolutionary view point,
however, it was also a land of opportunity, free of competitors and predators and
full of carbon dioxide and sunlight (the raw materials for photosynthesis, which are
present in far higher concentrations in air than in water).So once natural selection
had shaped the adaptations that helped plants overcome the obstacles to terrestrial
living, plants prospered and diversified.
When plants pioneered the land, they faced a range of challenges posedby
terrestrial environments. On land, the supportive buoyancy of water is missing, the
plant is no longer bathed in a nutrient solution, and air tends to dry things out.
These conditions favored the evolution of the structures that support the body,
vessels that transport water and nutrients to all parts of plant, and structures that
conserve water. The resulting adaptations to dry land include some structural
features that arose early in plant evolution; now these features are common to
virtually all land plant. They include roots or root like structures, a waxy cuticle
that covers the surfaces of leaves and stems and limits the evaporation of water,
and pores called stomata in leaves and stems that allow gas exchange but close
when water is scarce, thus reducing water loss. Other adaptations occurred later in
the transition to terrestrial life and now wide spread but not universal among
plants. These include conducting vessels that transport water and minerals upward
from the roots and that move the photosynthetic products from the leavesto the rest
of the plant body and the stiffening substance lignin, which support the plant body,
helping it expose maximum surface area to sunlight.
[259]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
These adaptations allowed an increasing diversity of plant forms to exploit dry
land. Life on land, however, also required new methods of transporting sperm to
eggs. Unlike aquatic and marine forms, land plants cannot always rely on water
currents to carry their sex cells and disperse their fertilized eggs. So the most
successful groups of land plants are those that evolved methods of fertilized sex
cell dispersal that are independent of water and structures that protest developing
embryos from drying out. Protected embryos and waterless dispersal of sex cells
were achieved with the origin of seed plants and the key evolutionary innovations
that they introduced: pollen, seeds, and later, flowers and fruits.
www.ZabanExam.com
[260]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 26
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[261]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Energy and the Industrial Revolution
For years historians have sought to identify crucial elements in the eighteenth-
century rise in industry, technology, and economic power known as the Industrial
Revolution, and many give prominence to the problem of energy. Until the
eighteenth century, people relied on energy derived from plants as well as animal
and human muscle to provide power. Increased efficiency in the use of water and
wind helped with such tasks as pumping, milling, or sailing. However, by the
eighteenth century, Great Britain in particular was experiencing an energy
shortage. Wood, the primary source of heat for homes and industries and also used
in the iron industry as processed charcoal, was diminishing in supply. Great Britain
had large amounts of coal; however, there were not yet efficient means by which to
produce mechanical energy or to power machinery. This was to occur with
progress in the development of the steam engine.
In the late 1700s James Watt designed an efficient and commercially viable steam
engine that was soon applied to a variety of industrial uses as it became cheaper to
use. The engine helped solve the problem of draining coal mines of groundwater
and increased the production of coal needed to power steam engines elsewhere. A
rotary engine attached to the steam engine enabled shafts to be turned and
machines to be driven, resulting in mills using steam power to spin and weave
cotton. Since the steam engine was fired by coal, the large mills did not need to be
located by rivers, as had mills that used water- driven machines. The shift to
increased mechanization in cotton production is apparent in the import of raw
cotton and the sale of cotton goods. Between 1760 and 1850, the amount of raw
cotton imported increased 230 times. Production of British cotton goods increased
sixtyfold, and cotton cloth became Great Britain’s most important product,
[262]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
accounting for one-half of all exports. The success of the steam engine resulted in
increased demands for coal, and the consequent increase in coal production was
made possible as the steam-powered pumps drained water from the ever-deeper
coal seams found below the water table.
The availability of steam power and the demands for new machines facilitated the
transformation of the iron industry. Charcoal, made from wood and thus in limited
supply, was replaced with coal-derived coke (substance left after coal is heated) as
steam-driven bellows came into use for producing of raw iron. Impurities were
burnt away with the use of coke, producing a high-quality refined iron. Reduced
cost was also instrumental in developing steam-powered rolling mills capable of
producing finished iron of various shapes and sizes. The resulting boom in the iron
industry expanded the annual iron output by more than 170 times between 1740
and 1840, and by the 1850s Great Britain was producing more tons of iron than the
rest of the world combined. The developments in the iron industry were in part a
response to the demand for more machines and the ever-widening use of higher-
quality iron in other industries.
Steam power and iron combined to revolutionize transport, which in turn had
further implications. Improvements in road construction and sailing had occurred,
but shipping heavy freight over land remained expensive, even with the use of
rivers and canals wherever possible. Parallel rails had long been used in mining
operations to move bigger loads, but horses were still the primary source of
power. However, the arrival of the steam engine initiated a complete
transformation in rail transportation, entrenching and expanding the Industrial
Revolution. As transportation improved, distant and larger markets within the
nation could be reached, thereby encouraging the development of larger factories
to keep pace with increasing sales. Greater productivity and rising demands
[263]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
provided entrepreneurs with profits that could be reinvested to take advantage of
new technologies to further expand capacity, or to seek alternative investment
opportunities.Also, the availability of jobs in railway construction attracted many
rural laborers accustomed to seasonal and temporary employment. When the work
was completed, many moved to other construction jobs or to factory work in cities
and towns, where they became part of an expanding working class.
www.ZabanExam.com
[264]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Survival of Plants and Animals in Desert
Conditions
The harsh conditions in deserts are intolerable for most plants and animals. Despite
these conditions, however, many varieties of plants and animals have adapted to
deserts in a number of ways. Most plant tissues die if their water content falls too
low: the nutrients that feed plants are transmitted by water; water is a raw material
in the vital process of photosynthesis; and water regulates the temperature of a
plant by its ability to absorb heat and because water vapor lost to the atmosphere
through the leaves helps to lower plant temperatures.Water controls the volume of
plant matter produced.The distribution of plants within different areas of desert is
also controlled by water.Some areas, because of their soil texture, topographical
position, or distance from rivers or groundwater, have virtually no water available
to plants, whereas others do.
The nature of plant life in deserts is also highly dependent on the fact that they
have to adapt to the prevailing aridity. There are two general classes of vegetation:
long-lived perennials, which may be succulent (water-storing) and are often
dwarfed and woody, and annuals or ephemerals, which have a short life cycle and
may form a fairly dense stand immediately after rain.
The ephemeral plants evade drought. Given a year of favorable precipitation, such
plants will develop vigorously and produce large numbers of flowers and fruit.
This replenishes the seed content of the desert soil. The seeds then lie dormant
until the next wet year, when the desert blooms again.
The perennial vegetation adjusts to the aridity by means of various avoidance
mechanisms. Most desert plants are probably best classified as xerophytes. They
[265]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
possess drought-resisting adaptations: loss of water through the leaves is reduced
by means of dense hairs covering waxy leaf surfaces, by the closure of pores
during the hottest times to reduce water loss, and by the rolling up or shedding of
leaves at the beginning of the dry season. Some xerophytes, the succulents
(including cacti), store water in their structures. Another way of countering drought
is to have a limited amount of mass above ground and to have extensive root
networks below ground. It is not unusual for the roots of some desert perennials to
extend downward more than ten meters. Some plants are woody in type —an
adaptation designed to prevent collapse of the plant tissue when water stress
produces wilting. Another class of desert plant is the phreatophyte. These have
adapted to the environment by the development of long taproots that penetrate
downward until they approach the assured water supply provided by groundwater.
Among these plants are the date palm, tamarisk, and mesquite. They commonly
grow near stream channels, springs, or on the margins of lakes.
Animals also have to adapt to desert conditions, and they may do it through two
forms of behavioral adaptation: they either escape or retreat. Escape involves such
actions as aestivation, a condition of prolonged dormancy, or torpor, during which
animals reduce their metabolic rate and body temperature during the hot season or
during very dry spells.
Seasonal migration is another form of escape, especially for large mammals or
birds. The term retreat is applied to the short-term escape behavior of desert
animals, and it usually assumes the pattern of a daily rhythm. Birds shelter in nests,
rock overhangs, trees, and dense shrubs to avoid the hottest hours of the day, while
mammals like the kangaroo rat burrow underground.
Some animals have behavioral, physiological, and morphological (structural)
adaptations that enable them to withstand extreme conditions. For example, the
[266]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
ostrich has plumage that is so constructed that the feathers are long but not too
dense. When conditions are hot, the ostrich erects them on its back, thus increasing
the thickness of the barrier between solar radiation and the skin. The sparse
distribution of the feathers, however, also allows considerable lateral air movement
over the skin surface, thereby permitting further heat loss by convection.
Furthermore, the birds orient themselves carefully with regard to the Sun and
gently flap their wings to increase convection cooling
[267]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Sumer and the First Cities of the Ancient
Near East
The earliest of the city states of the ancient Near East appeared at the southern end
of the Mesopotamian plain, the area between the Tigris and Euphrates rivers in
what is now Iraq. It was here that the civilization known as Sumer emerged in its
earliest form in the fifth millennium. At first sight, the plain did not appear to be a
likely home for a civilization. There were few natural resources, no timber, stone,
or metals. Rainfall was limited, and what water there was rushed across the plain in
the annual flood of melted snow. As the plain fell only 20 meters in 500
kilometers, the beds of the rivers shifted constantly. It was this that made the
organization of irrigation, particularly the building of canals to channel and
preserve the water, essential. Once this was done and the silt carried down by the
rivers was planted, the rewards were rich: four to five times what rain-fed earth
would produce. It was these conditions that allowed an elite to emerge, probably as
an organizing class, and to sustain itself through the control of surplus crops.
It is difficult to isolate the factors that led to the next development—the emergence
of urban settlements. The earliest, that of Eridu, about 4500 B.C.E., and Uruk, a
thousand years later, center on impressive temple complexes built of mud brick. In
some way, the elite had associated themselves with the power of the gods. Uruk,
for instance, had two patron gods—Anu, the god of the sky and sovereign of all
other gods, and Inanna, a goddess of love and war—and there were others, patrons
of different cities. Human beings were at their mercy. The biblical story of the
Flood may originate in Sumer. In the earliest version, the gods destroy the human
race because its clamor had been so disturbing to them.
[268]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
It used to be believed that before 3000 B.C.E. the political and economic life of the
cities was centered on their temples, but it now seems probable that the cities had
secular rulers from earliest times. Within the city lived administrators,
craftspeople, and merchants. (Trading was important, as so many raw materials,
the semiprecious stones for the decoration of the temples, timbers for roofs, and all
metals, had to be imported.) An increasingly sophisticated system of
administration led in about 3300 B.C.E. to the appearance of writing. The earliest
script was based on logograms, with a symbol being used to express a whole
word. The logograms were incised on damp clay tablets with a stylus with a wedge
shape at its end. (The Romans called the shape cuneus and this gives the script its
name of cuneiform.) Two thousand logograms have been recorded from these early
centuries of writing. A more economical approach was to use a sign to express not
a whole word but a single syllable. (To take an example: the Sumerian word for "
head” was “sag.” Whenever a word including a syllable in which the sound “sag”
was to be written, the sign for “sag" could be used to express that syllable with the
remaining syllables of the word expressed by other signs.) By 2300 B.C.E. the
number of signs required had been reduced to 600, and the range of words that
could be expressed had widened. Texts dealing with economic matters
predominated, as they always had done; but at this point works of theology,
literature, history, and law also appeared.
Other innovations of the late fourth millennium include the wheel, probably
developed first as a more efficient way of making pottery and then transferred to
transport. A tablet engraved about 3000 B.C.E. provides the earliest known
example from Sumer, a roofed boxlike sledge mounted on four solid wheels. A
major development was the discovery, again about 3000 B.C.E., that if copper,
which had been known in Mesopotamia since about 3500 B.C.E., was mixed with
[269]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
tin, a much harder metal, bronze, would result. Although copper and stone tools
continued to be used, bronze was far more successful in creating sharp edges that
could be used as anything from saws and scythes to weapons. The period from
3000 to 1000 B.C.E., when the use of bronze became widespread, is normally
referred to as the Bronze Age.
[270]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 27
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[271]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Crafts in the Ancient Near East
Some of the earliest human civilizations arose in southern Mesopotamia, in what is
now southern Iraq, in the fourth millennium B.C.E. In the second half of the
millennium, in the south around the city of Uruk, there was an enormous escalation
in the area occupied by permanent settlements. A large part of that increase took
place in Uruk itself, which became a real urban center surrounded by a set of
secondary settlements. While population estimates are notoriously unreliable,
scholars assume that Uruk inhabitants were able to support themselves from the
agricultural production of the field surrounding the city, which could be reached
with a daily commute. But Uruk’s dominant size in the entire region,
far surpassing that of other settlements, indicates that it was a regional center and a
true city. Indeed, it was the first city in human history.
The vast majority of its population remained active in agriculture, even those
people living within the city itself. But a small segment of the urban society started
to specialize in nonagricultural tasks as a result of the city’s role as a regional
center. Within the productive sector, there was a growth of a variety of specialist
craftspeople. Early in the Uruk period, the use of undecorated utilitarian pottery
was probably the result of specialized mass production. In an early fourth-
millennium level of the Eanna archaeological site at Uruk, a pottery style appears
that is most characteristic of this process, the so-called beveled-rim bowl. It is a
rather shallow bowl that was crudely made in a mold; hence, in only a limited
number of standard sizes. For some unknown reason, many were discarded, often
still intact, and thousands have been found all over the Near East. The beveled-rim
bowl is one of the most telling diagnostic finds for identifying an Uruk-period site.
[272]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Of importance is the fact that it was produced rapidly in large amounts, most likely
by specialists in a central location.
A variety of documentation indicates that certain goods, once made by a family
member as one of many duties, were later made by skilled artisans. Certain images
depict groups of people, most likely women, involved in weaving textiles, an
activity we know from later third-millennium texts to have been vital in the
economy and to have been centrally administered. Also, a specialized metal-
producing workshop may have been excavated in a small area at Uruk. It contained
a number of channels lined by a sequence of holes, about 50 centimeters deep, all
showing burn marks and filled with ashes. This has been interpreted as the remains
of a workshop where molten metal was scooped up from the channel and poured
into molds in the holes. Some type of mass production by specialists were involved
here.
Objects themselves suggest that they were the work of skilled professionals. In the
late Uruk period(3500-3100 B.C.E.), there first appeared a type of object that
remained characteristic for Mesopotamia throughout its entire history: the cylinder
seal.This was a small cylinder, usually no more than 3 centimeters high and 2
centimeters in diameter, of shell, bone, faience (a glassy type of stoneware), or
various types of stones, on which a scene was carved into the surface.When rolled
over a soft material----primarily the clay of bullae (round seals), tablets, or clay
lumps attached to boxes, jars, or door bolts----the scene would appear in relief,
easily legible.The technological knowledge needed to carved it was far superior to
that for stamp seals, which had happened in the early Neolithic period
(approximately 10,000-5000 B.C.E.).From the first appearance of cylinder seals,
the carved scenes could be highly elaborate and refined, indicating the work of
specialist stone-cutters. Similarly, the late Uruk period shows the first monumental
[273]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
art, relief, and statuary in the round, made with a degree of mastery that only a
professional could have produced.
www.ZabanExam.com
[274]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The Formation of Volcanic Islands
Earth’s surface is not made up of a single sheet of rock that forms a crust but rather
a number of “tectonic plates” that fit closely, like the pieces of a giant jigsaw
puzzle. Some plates carry islands or continents, others form the seafloor. All are
slowly moving because the plates float on a denser semi-liquid mantle, the layer
between the crust and Earth’s core. The plates have edges that are spreading
ridges (where two plates are moving apart and new seafloor is being
created), subduction zones (where two plates collide and one plunges beneath the
other), or transform faults (where two plates neither converge nor diverge but
merely move past one another). It is at the boundaries between plates that most of
Earth’s volcanism and earthquake activity occur.
Generally speaking, the interiors of plates are geologically uneventful. However,
there are exceptions. A glance at a map of the Pacific Ocean reveals that there are
many islands far out at sea that are actually volcanoes----many no longer active,
some overgrown with coral----that originated from activity at points in the interior
of the Pacific Plate that forms the Pacific seafloor.
How can volcanic activity occur so far from a plate boundary? The Hawaiian
islands provide a very instructive answer.Like many other island groups, they form
a chain. The Hawaiian Islands Chain extends northwest from the island of
Hawaii.In the 1840s American geologist James Daly observed that the different
Hawaii islands seem to share a similar geologic evolution but are progressively
more eroded, and therefore probable older, toward the northwest.Then in 1963, in
the early days of the development of the theory of plate tectonics. Canadian
geophysicist Tuzo Wilson realized that this age progression could result if the
islands were formed on a surface plate moving over a fixed volcanic source in the
[275]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
interior. Wilson suggested that the long chain of volcanoes stretching northwest
from Hawaii is simply the surface expression of a long-lived volcanic source
located beneath the tectonic plate in the mantle. Today’s most northwest island
would have been the first to form. They as the plate moved slowly northwest, new
volcanic islands would have forms as the plate moved over the volcanic source.
The most recent island, Hawaii, would be at the end of the chain and is now over
the volcanic source.
Although this idea was not immediately accepted, the dating of lavas in the Hawaii
(and other) chains showed that their ages increase away from the presently active
volcano, just as Daly had suggested. Wilson’s analysis of these data is now a
central part of plate tectonics. Most volcanoes that occur in the interiors of plates
are believed to be produced by mantle plumes, columns of molten rock that rise
from deep within the mantle. A volcano remains an active “hot spot” as long as it
is over the plume. The plumes apparently originate at great depths, perhaps as deep
as the boundary between the core and the mantle, and many have been active for a
very long time. The oldest volcanoes in the Hawaii hot-spot trail have ages close to
80 million years. Other islands, including Tahiti and Easter Islands in the pacific,
Reunion and Mauritius in the India Ocean, and indeed most of the large islands in
the world’s oceans, owe their existence to mantle plumes.
The oceanic volcanic islands and their hot-spot trails are thus especially useful for
geologist because they record the past locations of the plate over a fixed source.
They therefore permit the reconstruction of the process of seafloor spreading, and
consequently of the geography of continents and of ocean basins in the past. For
example, given the current position of the Pacific Plate, Hawaii is above the Pacific
Ocean hot spot. So the position of The Pacific Plate 50 million years ago can be
determined by moving it such that a 50-million-year-old volcano in the hot-spot
[276]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
trail sits at the location of Hawaii today. However because the ocean basins really
are short-lived features on geologic times scale, reconstruction the world’s
geography by backtracking along the hot-spot trail works only for the last 5 percent
or so of geologic time.
[277]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Predator-Prey Cycles
How do predators affect populations of the prey animals? The answer is not as
simple as might be thought. Moose reached Isle Royale in Lake Superior by
crossing over winter ice and multiplied freely there in isolation without predators.
When wolves later reached the island, naturalists widely assumed that the wolves
would play a key role in controlling the moose population. Careful studies have
demonstrated, however, that this is not the case. The wolves eat mostly old or
diseased animals that would not survive long anyway. In general, the moose
population is controlled by food availability, disease and other factors rather than
by wolves.
When experimental populations are set up under simple laboratory conditions, the
predator often exterminates its pre and then becomes extinct itself, having nothing
left to eat. However, if safe areas like those prey animals have in the wild are
provided, the prey population drops to low level but not extinction. Low prey
population levels then provide inadequate food for the predators, causing the
predator population to decrease. When this occurs, the prey population
can rebound. In this situation the predator and prey population may continue in this
cyclical pattern for some time.
Population cycles are characteristic of small mammals, and they sometimes appear
to be brought about by predators. Ecologists studying hare populations have found
that the North American snow shoe hare follows a roughly ten-year cycle. Its
numbers fall tenfold to thirty in a typical cycle, and a hundredfold change can
occur. Two factors appear to be generating the cycle: food plants and predators.
The preferred foods of snowshoe hares are willow and birch twigs. As hare density
increases, the quantity of these twigs decreases, forcing the hares to feed on low-
[278]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
quality high-fiber food. Lower birth rates, low juvenile survivorship, and low
growth rates follow, so there is a corresponding decline in hare abundance. Once
the hare population has declined, it takes two to three year for the quantity of twigs
to recover.
A key predator of the snowshoe hare is the Canada lynx. The Canada lynx shows a
ten-year cycle of abundance that parallels the abundance cycle of hares. As hare
numbers fall, so do lynx numbers, as their food supply depleted.
What causes the predator-prey oscillations? Do increasing number of hares lead to
overharvesting of plants, which in turn results in reduced hare populations, or do
increasing numbers of lynx lead to overharvesting hares? Field experiments carried
out by Charles Krebs and coworkers in 1992 provide an answer. Krebs investigated
experimental plots in Canada’s Yukon territory that contained hare populations.
When food was added to those plots (no food effect) and predators were excluded
(no predator effect) from an experimental area, hare numbers increased tenfold and
stayed there—the cycle was lost. However, the cycle was retained if either of the
factors was allowed to operate alone: if predators were excluded but food was not
added (food effect alone), or if food was added in the presence of predators
(predator effect alone). Thus both factors can affect the cycle, which, in practice,
seems to be generated by conjunction of the two factors.
Predators are an essential factor in maintaining communities that are rich and
diverse in species. Without predators, the species that is the best competitor for
food, shelter, nesting sites, and other environmental resources tends to dominate
and exclude the species with which it competes. This phenomenon is known as
“competitor exclusion”.However, if the community contains a predator of the
strongest competitor species, then the population of that competitor is
controlled. Thus even the less competitive species are able to survive. For example,
[279]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
sea stars prey on a variety of bivalve mollusks and prevent these bivalves from
monopolizing habitats on the sea floor. This opens up space for many other
organisms. When sea stars are removed, species diversity falls sharply. Therefore,
from the stand point of diversity, it is usually a mistake to eliminate a major
predator from a community.
[280]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 28
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[281]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Groundwater
Most of the world’s potable water----freshwater suitable for drinking----is
accounted for by groundwater, which is stored in the pores and fractures in rocks.
There is more than 50 times as much freshwater stored underground than in all the
freshwater rivers and lakes at the surface. Nearly 50 percent of all groundwater is
stored in the upper 1,000 meters of Earth. At greater depths within Earth, the
pressure of the overlying rock causes pores and cracks to close, reducing the space
that pore water can occupy, and almost complete closure occurs at a depth of about
10 kilometers. The greatest water storage, therefore, lies near the surface.
Aquifers, Porosity and Permeability.Groundwater is stored in a variety of rock
types. A groundwater reservoir from which water can be extractedis called an
aquifer. We can effectively think of an aquifer as a deposit of water. Extraction of
water depends on two properties of the aquifer: porosity and permeability.
Between sediment grains are spaces that can be filled with water. This pore space
is known as porosity and is expressed as a percentage of the total rock volume.
Porosity is important for water-storage capacity, but for water to flow through
rocks, the pore spaces must be connected. The ability of water, or other fluids, to
flow through the interconnected pore spaces in rocks is termedpermeability. In the
intergranular spaces of rocks, however, fluid must flow around and between grains
in a tortuous path; this winding path causes a resistance to flow. The rate at which
the flowing water overcomes this resistance is related to the permeability of rock.
Sediment sorting and compaction influence permeability and porosity. The more
poorly sorted or the more tightly compacted a sediment is ,the lower its porosity
and permeability. Sedimentary rocks----the most common rock type near the
surface----are also the most common reservoirs for water because they contain the
[282]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
most space that can be filled with water. Sandstones generally make good aquifers,
while finer-grained mudstones are typically impermeable. Impermeable rocks are
referred to as aquicludes. Igneous and metamorphic rocks are more compact,
commonly crystalline, and rarely contain spaces between grains. However, even
igneous and metamorphic rocks may act as groundwater reservoirs if extensive
fracturing occurs in such rocks and if the fracture system is interconnected.
The water table is the underground boundary below which all the cracks and pores
are filled with water. In some cases, the water table reaches Earth’s surface, where
it is expressed as rivers, lakes and marshes.Typically, though, the water table may
be tens or hundreds of meters below the surface. The water table is not flat but
usually follows the contours of the topography. Above the water table is the vadose
zone, through which rainwater percolates. Water in the vadose zone drains down to
the water table, leaving behind a thin coating of water on mineral grains. The
vadose zone supplies plant roots near the surface with water.
Because the surface of the water table is not flat but instead rises and falls with
topography, groundwater is affected by gravity in the same fashion as surface
water. Groundwater flows downhill to topographic lows. If the water table intersect
the land surface, groundwater will flow out onto the surface at springs, whether to
be collected there or to subsequently flow farther along a drainage. Groundwater
commonly collects in stream drainages but may remain entirely beneath the surface
of dry stream-beds in arid regions. In particularly wet years, short stretches of an
otherwise dry stream-bed may have flowing water because the water table rises to
intersect the land surface.
www.ZabanExam.com
[283]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Early Saharan Pastoralists
The Sahara is a highly diverse, albeit dry, region that has undergone major climatic
changes since 10,000 B.C. As recently as 6,000 B.C. the southern frontier of the
desert was far to the north of where it is now, while semiarid grassland and shallow
freshwater lakes covered much of what are now arid plains. This was a landscape
where antelope of all kinds abounded----along with Bos primigenius, a kind of
oxen that has become extinct. The areas that are now desert were, like all arid
regions, very susceptible to cycles of higher and lower levels of rainfall, resulting
in major, sudden changes in distributions of plants and animals. The people who
hunted the sparse desert animals responded to drought by managing the wild
resources they hunted and gathered, especially wild oxen, which had to have
regular water supplies to survive.
Even before the drought, the Sahara was never well watered. Both humans and
animals were constantly on the move, in search of food and reliable water supplies.
Under these circumstances, archaeologist Andrew Smith believes, the small herds
of Bos primigenius in the desert became smaller, more closely knit breeding units
as the drought took hold. The beasts were more disciplined, so that it was easier for
hunters to predict their habits, and capture animals at will. At the same time, both
cattle and humans were more confined in their movements, staying much closer to
permanent water supplies for long periods of time. As a result, cattle and humans
came into close association.
Smith believes that the hunters were well aware of the more disciplined ways in
which their prey behaved.Instead of following the cattle on their annual migrations,
the hunters began to prevent the herd from moving from one spot to another.At
first, they controlled the movement of the herd while ensuring continuance of their
[284]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
meat diet. But soon they also gained genetic control of the animals, which led to
rapid physical changes in the herd.South African farmers who maintain herds of
wild eland (large African antelopes with short, twisted horns) report that the
offspring soon diminish in size, unless wild bulls are introduced constantly from
outside. The same effects of inbreeding may have occurred in controlled cattle
populations, with some additional, and perhaps unrecognized, advantages. The
newly domesticated animals behaved better, were easier to control, and may have
enjoyed a higher birth rate, which in turn yielded greater milk supplies. We know
from rock paintings deep in the Sahara that the herders were soon selecting
breeding animals to produce offspring with different horn shapes and hide colors.
It is still unclear whether domesticated cattle were tamed independently in northern
Africa or introduced to the continent from southwest Asia. Whatever the source of
the original tamed herds might have been, it seems entirely likely that much the
same process of juxtaposition (living side by side) and control occurred in both
southwest Asia and northern Africa, and even in Europe, among peoples who had
an intimate knowledge of the behavior of wild cattle. The experiments with
domestication probably occurred in many places, as people living in ever-drier
environments cast around for more predictable food supplies.
The cattle herders had only a few possessions: unsophisticated pots and polished
adzes. They also hunted with bow and arrow. The Saharan people left a remarkable
record of their lives painted on the walls of caves deep in the desert. Their
artistic endeavors have been preserved in paintings of wild animals, cattle, goats,
humans, and scenes of daily life that extend back perhaps to 5,000 B.C.. The
widespread distribution of pastoral sites of this period suggests that the Saharans
ranged their herds over widely separated summer and winter grazing grounds.
[285]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
About 3,500 B.C., climatic conditions again deteriorated. The Sahara slowly
became drier and lakes vanished. On the other hand, rainfall increased in the
interior of western Africa, and the northern limit of the tsetse fly, an insect fatal to
cattle, moved south. So the herders shifted south, following the major river systems
into savanna regions. By this time, the Saharan people were probably using
domestic crops, experimenting with such summer rainfall crops as sorghum and
millet as they move out of areas where they could grow wheat, barley, and other
Mediterranean crops.
[286]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Buck Rubs and Buck Scrapes
A conspicuous sign indicating the presence of white-tailed deer in a woodlot is a
buck rub. A male deer makes a buck rub by striping the bark (outer layer) of a
small tree with its antlers. When completed, the buck rub is an obvious visual
signal to us and presumable to other deer in the area.A rub is usually located at the
shoulder height of a deer (one meter or less above the ground) on a smooth-barked,
small-diameter (16-25 millimeters) tree.The smooth bark of small red maples
makes this species ideal for buck rubs in the forests of the mid-eastern United
States.
Adult male deer usually produce rubs in late summer or early autumn when the
outer velvet layer is being shed from their antlers. Rubs are created about one to
two months before the breeding season (the rut). Hence for a long time biologists
believed that male deer used buck rubs not only to clean and polish antlers but also
to provide practice for the ensuing male-to-male combat during the rut. However,
biologists also noted deer sniff and lick an unfamiliar rub, which suggests that this
visual mark on a small tree plays an important communication purpose in the
social life of deer.
Buck rubs also have a scent produced by glands in the foreheads of deer that is
transferred to the tree when the rub is made. These odors make buck rubs an
important means of olfactory communication between deer. The importance of
olfactory communication (using odors to communicate) in the way of life of deer
was documented by a study of captive adult male deer a few decades ago, which
noted that males rubbed their foreheads on branches and twigs, especially as
autumn approached. A decade later another study reported that adult male white-
tailed deer exhibited forehead rubbing just before and during the rut. It was found
[287]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
that when a white-tailed buck makes a rub, it moves both antlers and forehead
glands along the small tree in a vertical direction. This forehead rubbing behavior
coincides with a high level of glandular activity in the modified scent glands found
on the foreheads of male deer; the glandular activity causes the forehead pelage
(hairy covering) of adult males to be distinctly darker than in females or younger
males.
Forehead rubbing by male deer on buck rubs presumably sends a great deal of
information to other members of the same species. First, the chemicals deposited
on the rub provide information on the individual identity of an animal; no two
mammals produce the same scent. For instance, as we all know, dogs recognize
each other via smell. Second, because only male deer rub, the buck rub and its
associated chemicals indicate the sex of the deer producing the rub. Third, older,
more dominant bucks produce more buck rubs and probably deposit more
glandular secretions on a given rub. Thus the presence of many well-marked rubs
is indicative of older, higher-status males being in the general vicinity rather than
simply being a crude measure of relative deer abundance in a given area. The
information conveyed by the olfactory signals on a buck rub make it the social
equivalent of some auditory signals in other deer species, such as trumpeting by
bull elk.
Because both sexes of white-tailed respond to buck rubs by smelling and licking
them, rubs may serve a very important additional function. Fresher buck rubs (less
than two days old), in particular, are visited more frequently by adult females than
older rubs. In view of this behavior it has been suggested that chemicals present in
fresh buck rubs may help physiologically induce and synchronize fertility in
females that visit these rubs. This would be an obvious advantage to wide-ranging
deer, especially to a socially dominant buck when courting several adult females
[288]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
during the autumn rut. Another visual signal produced by while-tailed deer
is termed a buck scrape. Scrapes consist of a clearing (about 0.5 meter in diameter)
and shallow depression made by pushing aside the leaves covering the ground;
after making the scrape, the deer typically urinates in the depression. Thus, like a
buck rub, a scrape is both a visual and an olfactory signal. Buck scrapes are
generally created after leaf-fall in autumn, which is just before or during the rut.
Scrapes are usually placed in open or conspicuous places, such as along a deer
trail. Most are made by older males, although females and younger males (2.5
years old or less) occasionally make scrapes.
[289]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 29
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[290]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Characteristics of Roman Pottery
The pottery of ancient Romans is remarkable in several ways. The high quality of
Roman pottery is very easy to appreciate when handling actual pieces of tableware
or indeed kitchenware and amphorae (the large jars used throughout the
Mediterranean for the transport and storage of liquids, such as wine and oil).
However, it is impossible to do justice to Roman wares on the page, even when
words can be backed up by photographs and drawing. Most Roman pottery is light
and smooth to touch and very tough, although, like all pottery, it shatters if
dropped on a hard surface. It is generally made with carefully selected and purified
clay, worked to thin-walled and standardized shapes on a fast wheel and fired in a
kiln (pottery oven) capable of ensuring a consistent finish. With handmade pottery,
inevitably there are slight differences between individual vessels of the same
design and occasional minor blemishes (flaws). But what strikes the eye and the
touch most immediately and most powerfully with Roman pottery is its consistent
high quality.
This is not just an aesthetic consideration but also a practical one. These vessels are
solid (brittle, but not fragile), they are pleasant and easy to handle (being light and
smooth), and, with their hard and sometimes glossy (smooth and shiny) surfaces,
they hold liquids well and are easy to wash. Furthermore, their regular and
standardized shapes would have made them simple to stack and store. When
people today are shown a very ordinary Roman pot and, in particular, are allowed
to handle it, they often comment on how modern it looks and feels, and they need
to be convinced of its true age.
As impressive as the quality of Roman pottery is its sheer massive quantity. When
considering quantities, we would ideally like to have some estimates for overall
[291]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
production from particular sites of pottery manufacture and for overall
consumption at specific settlements. Unfortunately, it is in the nature of the
archaeological evidence, which is almost invariable only a sample of what once
existed, that such figures will always be elusive. However, no one who has ever
worked in the field would question the abundance of Roman pottery, particularly in
the Mediterranean region. This abundance is notable in Roman settlements
(especially urban sites) where the labor that archaeologists have to put into the
washing and sorting of potsherds (fragments of pottery) constitutes a high
proportion of the total work during the initial phases of excavation.
Only rarely can we derive any “real” quantities from deposits of broken
pots. However, there is one exceptional dump, which does represent a very large
part of the site’s total history of consumption and for which an estimate of quantity
has been produced. On the left bank of the Tiber River in Rome, by one of the river
ports of the ancient city, is a substantial hill some 50 meters high called Monte
Testaccio.It is made up entirely of broken oil amphorae, mainly of the second and
third centuries A.D. It has been estimated that Monte Testaccio contains the
remains of some 53 million amphorae, in which around 6,000million liters of oil
were imported into the city from overseas, imports into imperial Rome were
supported by the full might of the state and were therefore quite exceptional----but
the size of the operations at Monte Testaccio, and the productivity and complexity
that lay behind them, nonetheless cannot fail to impress. This was a society with
similarities to modern one----moving goods on a gigantic scale, manufacturing
high-quality containers to do so, and occasionally, as here, even discarding them
on delivery.
Roman pottery was transported not only in large quantities but also over
substantial distances. Many Roman pots, in particular amphorae and the fine wares
[292]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
designed for use at tables, could travel hundreds of miles----all over the
Mediterranean and also further afield. But maps that show the various spots where
Roman pottery of a particular type has been found tell only part of the story. What
is more significant than any geographical spread is the access that different levels
of society had to good-quality products. In all but the remotest regions of the
empire, Roman pottery of a high standard is common at the sites of humblevillages
and isolated farmsteads.
www.ZabanExam.com
[293]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Competition
When several individuals of the same species or of several different species depend
on the same limited resource, a situation may arise that is referred to as
competition. The existence of competition has been long known to naturalists; its
effects were described by Darwin in considerable detail. Competition among
individuals of the same species (intraspecies competition), one of the
major mechanisms of natural selection, is the concern of evolutionary biology.
Competition among the individuals of different species (interspecies competition)
is a major concern of ecology. It is one of the factors controlling the size of
competing populations, and extreme cases it may lead to the extinction of one of
the competing species. This was described by Darwin for indigenous New Zealand
species of animals and plants, which died out when competing species from
Europe were introduced.
No serious competition exists when the major needed resource is in superabundant
supply, as in most cases of the coexistence of herbivores (plant eaters).
Furthermore, most species do not depend entirely on a single resource, if the major
resource for a species becomes scarce, the species can usually shift to alternative
resources. If more than one species is competing for a scarce resource, the
competing species usually switch to different alternative resources. Competition is
usually most severe among close relatives with similar demands on the
environment. But it may also occur among totally unrelated forms that compete for
the same resource, such as seed-eating rodents and ants. The effects of such
competition are graphicallydemonstrated when all the animals or all the plants in
an ecosystem come into competition, as happened 2 million years ago at the end of
Pliocene, when North and South America became joined by the Isthmus of
[294]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Panama. North and South American species migrating across the Isthmus now
came into competition with each other. The result was the extermination of a large
fraction of the South American mammals, which were apparently unable to
withstand the competition from invading North American species----although
added predation was also an important factor.
To what extent competition determines the composition of a community and the
density of particular species has been the source of considerable controversy. The
problem is that competition ordinarily cannot be observed directly but must be
inferred from the spread or increase of one species and the concurrent reduction or
disappearance of another species. The Russian biologist G. F. Gause performed
numerous two-species experiments in the laboratory, in which one of the species
became extinct when only a single kind of resource was available. On the basis of
these experiments and of field observations, the so-called law of competitive
exclusion was formulated, according to which no two species can occupy the same
niche. Numerous seeming exceptions to this law have since been found, but they
can usually be explained as cases in which the two species, even though competing
for a major joint resource, did not really occupy exactly the same niche.
Competition among species is of considerable evolutionary importance. The
physical structure of species competing for resources in the same ecological niche
tends to gradually evolve in ways that allow them to occupy different niches.
Competing species also tend to change their ranges so that their territories no
longer overlap. The evolutionary effect of competition on species has been referred
to as “species selection”; however, this description is potentially misleading. Only
the individuals of a species are subject to the pressures of natural selection. The
effect on the well-being and existence of a species is just the result of the effects of
[295]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
selection on all the individuals of the species. Thus species selection is actually a
result of individual selection.
Competition may occur for any needed resource. In the case of animals it is usually
food; in the case of forest plants it may be light; in the case of substrate inhabitants
it may be space, as in many shallow-water bottom-dwelling marine
organisms. Indeed, it may be for any of the factors, physical as well as biotic, that
are essential for organisms.Competition is usually the more severe the denser the
population. Together with predation, it is the most important density-dependent
factor in regulating population growth.
[296]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The History of Waterpower
Moving water was one of the earliest energy sources to be harnessed to reduce the
workload of people and animals. No one knows exactly when the waterwheel was
invented, but irrigation systems existed at least 5,000 years ago, and it seems
probable that the earliest waterpower device was the noria, a waterwheel that
raised water for irrigation in attached jars. The device appears to have evolved no
later than the fifth century B.C., perhaps independently in different regions of the
Middle and Far East.
The earliest waterpower mills were probably vertical-axis mills for grinding corn,
known as Norse or Greek mills, which seem to have appeared during the first or
second century B.C. in the Middle East and a few centuries later in Scandinavia. In
the following centuries, increasingly sophisticated waterpower mills were built
throughout the Roman Empire and beyond its boundaries in the Middle East and
northern Europe. In England, the Saxons are thought to have used both horizontal
and vertical-axis wheels. The first documented English mill was in the eighth
century, but three centuries later about 5,000 were recorded, suggesting that every
settlement of any size had its mill.
Raising water and grinding corn were by no means the only uses of the waterpower
mill, and during the following centuries, the application of waterpower kept pace
with the developing technologies of mining, iron working, paper making, and the
wool and cotton industries. Water was the main source of mechanical power, and
by the end of the seventeenth century, England alone is thought to have had some
20,000 working mill. There was much debate on the relative efficiencies of
different types of waterwheels. The period from about 1650 until 1800 saw some
excellent scientific and technical investigations of different designs.They revealed
[297]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
output powers ranging from about 1 horsepower to perhaps 60 for the largest
wheels and confirmed that for maximum efficiency, the water should pass across
the blades as smoothly as possible and fall away with minimum speed, having
given up almost all of its kinetic energy. (They also proved that, in principle, the
overshot wheel, a type of wheel in which an overhead stream of water powers the
wheel, should win the efficiency competition.)
But then steam power entered the scene, putting the whole future of waterpower in
doubt. An energy analyst writing in the year 1800 would have painted a
very pessimistic picture of the future for waterpower. The coal-fired steam engine
was taking over, and the waterwheel was fast becoming obsolete. However, like
many later experts, this one would have suffered from an inability to see into the
future. A century later the picture was completely different: by then, the world had
an electric industry, and a quarter of its generating capacity was water powered.
The growth of the electric-power industry was the result of a remarkable series of
scientific discoveries and development in electrotechnology during the nineteenth
century, but significant changes in what we might now call hydro (water)
technology also played their part. In 1832, the year of Michael Faraday’s discovery
that a changing magnetic field produces an electric field, a young French engineer
patented a new and more efficient waterwheel. His name was Benoit Fourneyron,
and his device was the first successful water turbine. The waterwheel, unalteredfor
nearly 2,000 years, had finally been superseded.
Half a century of development was needed before Faraday’s discoveries in
electricity were translated into full-scale power stations. In 1881 the Godalming
power station in Surrey, England, on the banks of the Wey River, created the
world’s first public electricity supply. The power source of this most modern
technology was a traditional waterwheel. Unfortunately this early plant
[298]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
experienced the problem common to many forms of renewable energy: the flow in
the Wey River was unreliable, and the waterwheel was soon replaced by a steam
engine.
From this primitive start, the electric industry grew during the final 20 years of the
nineteenth century at a rate seldom if ever exceeded by any technology. The
capacity of individual power stations, many of them hydro plants, rose from a few
kilowatts to over a megawatt in less than a decade.
[299]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 30
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[300]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Role of Play in Development
Play is easier to define with examples than with concepts. In any case, in animals it
consists of leaping, running, climbing, throwing, wrestling, and other movements,
either along, with objects, or with other animals. Depending on the species, play
may be primarily for social interaction, exercise, or exploration. One of the
problems in providing a clear definition of play is that it involves the same
behaviors that take place in other circumstance--dominance, predation,
competition, and real fighting. Thus, whether play occurs or not depends on the
intention of the animals, and the intentions are not always clear from behaviors
alone.
Play appears to be a developmental characteristic of animals with fairly
sophisticated nervous systems, mainly birds and mammals. Play has been studied
most extensively in primates and canids (dogs). Exactly why animals play is still a
matter debated in the research literature, and the reasons may not be the same for
every species that plays. Determining the functions of play is difficult because the
functions may be long-term, with beneficial effects not showing up until the
animal's adulthood.
Play is not without considerable costs to the individual animal. Play is usually very
active, involving movement in space and, at times, noisemaking. Therefore, it
results in the loss of fuel or energy that might better be used for growth or for
building up fat stores in a young animal. Another potential cost of this activity is
greater exposure to predators since play is attention-getting behavior. Great
activities also increase the risk of injury in slipping or falling.
The benefits of play must outweigh costs, or play would not have evolved,
according to Darwin' s theory. Some of the potential benefits relate directly to the
[301]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
healthy development of the brain and nervous system. In one research study, two
groups of young rats were raised under different conditions. One group developed
in an "enriched" environment, which allowed the rats to interact with other rats,
play with toys, and receive maze training. The other group lived in an
"impoverished" environment in individual cages in a dimly lit room with little
stimulation. At the end of the experiments, the results showed that the actual
weight of the brains of the impoverished rats was less than that of those raised in
the enriched environment (though they were fed the same diets). Other studies
have shown that greater stimulation not only affects the size of the brain but also
increase the number of connections between the nerve cells. Thus, active play may
provide necessary stimulation to the growth of synaptic connections in the brain,
especially the cerebellum, which is responsible for motor functioning and
movements.
Play also stimulates the development of the muscle tissues themselves and may
provide the opportunities to practice those movements needed for survival. Prey
species, like young deer or goats, for example, typically play by performing sudden
flight movements and turns, whereas predator species, such as cats, practice
stalking, pouncing, and biting.
Play allows a young animal to explore its environment and practice skill
in comparative safety since the surrounding adults generally do not expect the
young to deal with threats or predators. Play can also provide practice in social
behaviors needed for courtship and mating. Learning appropriate social behaviors
is especially important for species that live in groups, like young monkeys that
needed to learn to control selfishness and aggression and to understand the give-
and-take involved in social groups. They need to learn how to be dominant and
submissive because each monkey might have to play either role in the future. Most
[302]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
of these things are learned in the long developmental periods that primates have,
during which they engage in countless play experiences with their peers.
There is a danger, of course, that play may be misinterpreted or not recognized as
play by others, potentially leading to aggression. This is especially true when play
consists of practicing normal aggressive or predator behaviors. Thus, many species
have evolved clear signals to delineate playfulness. Dogs, for example, will wag
their tails, get down their front legs, and stick their behinds in the air to indicate
"what follows is just for play."
www.ZabanExam.com
[303]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The Pace of Evolutionary Change
A heated debate has enlivened recent studies of evolution. Darwin' s original
thesis, and the viewpoint supported by evolutionary gradualists, is that species
change continuously but slowly and in small increments. Such changes are all but
invisible over the short time scale of modern observations, and, it is argued, they
are usually obscured by innumerable gaps in the imperfect fossil record.
Gradualism, with its stress on the slow pace of change, is a comforting position,
repeated over and over again in generations of textbooks. By the early twentieth
century, the question about the rate of evolution had been answered in favor of
gradualism to most biologists' satisfaction.
Sometimes a closed question must be reopened as new evidence or new arguments
based on old evidence come to light. In 1972 paleontologist Stephen Jay Gould and
Niles Eldredge challenged conventional wisdom with an opposing viewpoint, the
punctuated equilibrium hypothesis, which posits that species give rise to new
species in relatively sudden bursts, without a lengthy transition period.These
episodes of rapid evolution are separated by relatively long static spans during
which a species may hardly change at all.
The punctuated equilibrium hypothesis attempts to explain a curious feature of the
fossil record --- one that has been familiar to paleontologist for more than a century
but has usually been ignored. Many species appear to remain unchanged in the
fossil record for millions of years --- a situation that seems to be at odds with
Darwin' s model of continuous change. Intermediated fossil forms, predicted by
gradualism, are typically lacking. In most localities a given species of clam or coral
persists essentially unchanged throughout a thick formation of rock, only to be
replaced suddenly by a new and different species.
[304]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The evolution of North American horse, which was once presented as a classic
textbook example of gradual evolution, is now providing
equally compelling evidence for punctuated equilibrium. A convincing 50-million-
year sequence of modern horse ancestors --- each slightly larger, with more
complex teeth, a longer face, and a more prominent central toe ---seemed to
provide strong support for Darwin' s contention that species evolve gradually. But
close examination of those fossil deposits now reveals a somewhat different story.
Horses evolved in discrete steps, each of which persisted almost unchanged for
millions of years and was eventually replaced by a distinctive newer model. The
four-toed Eohippus preceded the three-toed Miohippus, for example, but North
American fossil evidence suggests a jerky, uneven transition between the two. If
evolution had been a continuous, gradual process, one might expect that almost
every fossil specimen would be slightly different from every year.
If it seems difficult to conceive how major changes could occur rapidly, consider
this: an alteration of a single gene in files is enough to turn a normal fly with a
single pair of wings into one that has two pairs of wings.
The question about the rate of evolution must now be turned around: does
evolution ever proceed gradually, or does it always occur in short bursts? Detailed
field studies of thick rock formations containing fossils provide the best potential
tests of the competing theories.
Occasionally , a sequence of fossil-rich layers of rock permits a comprehensive
look at one type of organism over a long period of time. For example, Peter
Sheldon' s studies of trilobites, a now extinct marine animal with a segmented
body, offer a detailed glimpse into three million years of evolution in one marine
environment. In that study, each of eight different trilobite species was observed to
undergo a gradual change in the number of segments --- typically an increase of
[305]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
one or two segments over the whole time interval. No significant discontinuous
were observed, leading Sheldon to conclude that environmental conditions were
quite stable during the period he examined.
Similar exhaustive studies are required for many different kinds of organisms from
many different periods. Most researchers expect to find that both modes of
transition from one species to another are at work in evolution. Slow, continuous
change may be the norm during periods of environmental stability, while rapid
evolution of new species occurs during periods of environment stress. But a lot
more studies like Sheldon' s are needed before we can say for sure.
[306]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The Invention of the Mechanical Clock
In Europe, before the introduction of the mechanical clock, people told time by sun
(using, for example, shadow sticks or sun dials) and water clocks. Sun clocks
worked, of course, only on clear days; water clocks misbehaved when the
temperature fell toward freezing, to say nothing of long-run drift as the result of
sedimentation and clogging. Both these devices worked well in sunny climates;
but in northern Europe the sun may be hidden by clouds for weeks at a time, while
temperatures vary not only seasonally but from day to night.
Medieval Europe gave new importance to reliable time. The Catholic Church had
its seven daily prayers, one of which was at night, requiring an alarm arrangement
to waken monks before dawn. And then the new cities and towns, squeezed by
their walls, had to know and order time in order to organize collective activity and
ration space. They set a time to go to sleep,to open the market ,to close the market
,to leave work ,and finally a time to put out fires and to go to sleep. All this was
compatible with older devices so long as there was only
one authoritativetimekeeper; but with urban growth and the multiplication of time
signals, discrepancy brought discord and strife. Society needed a more dependable
instrument of time measurement and found it in the mechanical clock.
We do not know who invented this machine, or where. It seems to have appeared
in Italy and England (perhaps simultaneous invention) between 1275 and 1300.
Once known, it spread rapidly, driving out water clocks but not solar dials, which
were needed to check the new machines against the timekeeper of last resort.
These early versions were rudimentary, inaccurate, and prone to breakdown.
Ironically, the new machine tended to undermine Catholic Church authority.
Although church ritual had sustained an interest in timekeeping throughout the
[307]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
centuries of urban collapse that followed the fall of Rome, church time was nature’
s time.Day and night were divided into the same number of parts, so that except at
the equinoxes, days and night hours were unequal; and then of course the length of
these hours varied with the seasons.But the mechanical clock kept equal hours, and
this implied a new time reckoning.The Catholic Church resisted, not coming over
to the new hours for about a century.From the start, however, the towns and cities
took equal hours as their standard, and the public clocks installed in town halls and
market squares became the very symbol of a new, secular municipal authority.
Every town wanted one; conquerors seized them as especially precious spoils of
war; tourists came to see and hear these machines the way they made pilgrimages
to sacred relics.
The clock was the greatest achievement of medieval mechanical ingenuity. Its
general accuracy could be checked against easily observed phenomena, like the
rising and setting of the sun. The result was relentless pressure to improve
technique and design. At every stage, clockmakers led the way to accuracy and
precision; they became masters of miniaturization, detectors and correctors of
error, searchers for new and better. They were thus the pioneers of mechanical
engineering and served as examples and teachers to other branches of engineering.
The clock brought order and control, both collective and personal. Its public
display and private possession laid the basis for temporal autonomy: people could
now coordinate comings and goings without dictation from above. The clock
provided the punctuation marks for group activity, while enabling individuals to
order their own work (and that of others) so as to enhance productivity. Indeed, the
very notion of productivity is a by-product of the clock: once on can relate
performance to uniform time units, work is never the same. One moves from the
task-oriented time consciousness of the peasant (working on job after another, as
[308]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
time and light permit) and the time-filling busyness of the domestic servant (who
always had something to do) to an effort to maximize product per unit of time.