11-20
Ancient Egyptian Sculpture
In order to understand ancient Egyptian art, it is vital to know as much as possible
of the elite Egyptians' view of the world and the functions and contexts of the art
produced for them. Without this knowledge we can appreciate only the formal
content of Egyptian art, and we will fail to understand why it was produced or the
concepts that shaped it and caused it to adopt its distinctive forms. In fact, a lack of
understanding concerning the purposes of Egyptian art has often led it to be
compared unfavorably with the art of other cultures: Why did the Egyptians not
develop sculpture in which the body turned and twisted through space like classical
Greek statuary? Why do the artists seem to get left and right confused? And why
did they not discover the geometric perspective as European artists did in the
Renaissance? The answer to such questions has nothing to do with a lack of skill or
imagination on the part of Egyptian artists and everything to do with the purposes
for which they were producing their art.
The majority of three-dimensional representations, whether standing, seated, or
kneeling, exhibit what is called frontality: they face straight ahead, neither twisting
nor turning. When such statues are viewed in isolation, out of their
original context and without knowledge of their function, it is easy to criticize
them for their rigid attitudes that remained unchanged for three thousand years.
Frontality is, however, directly related to the functions of Egyptian statuary and the
contexts in which the statues were set up. Statues were created not for their
decorative effect but to play a primary role in the cults of the gods, the king, and
the dead. They were designed to be put in places where these beings could
manifest themselves in order to be the recipients of ritual actions. Thus it made
sense to show the statue looking ahead at what was happening in front of it, so that
[112]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
the living performer of the ritual could interact with the divine or deceased
recipient. Very often such statues were enclosed in rectangular shrines or wall
niches whose only opening was at the front, making it natural for the statue to
display frontality. Other statues were designed to be placed within an architectural
setting, for instance, in front of the monumental entrance gateways to temples
known as pylons, or in pillared courts, where they would be placed against or
between pillars: their frontality worked perfectly within the architectural context.
Statues were normally made of stone, wood, or metal. Stone statues were worked
from single rectangular blocks of material and retained the compactness of the
original shape. The stone between the arms and the body and between the legs in
standing figures or the legs and the seat in seated ones was not normally cut away.
From a practical aspect this protected the figures against breakage and
psychologically gives the images a sense of strength and power, usually enhanced
by a supporting back pillar. By contrast, wooden statues were carved from several
pieces of wood that were pegged together to form the finished work, and metal
statues were either made by wrapping sheet metal around a wooden core or cast by
the lost wax process. The arms could be held away from the body and carry
separate items in their hands; there is no back pillar. The effect is altogether lighter
and freer than that achieved in stone, but because both perform the same function,
formal wooden and metal statues still display frontality.
Apart from statues representing deities, kings, and named members of the elite that
can be called formal, there is another group of three-dimensional representations
that depicts generic figures, frequently servants, from the nonelite population. The
function of these is quite different. Many are made to be put in the tombs of the
elite in order to serve the tomb owners in the afterlife. Unlike formal statues that
are limited to static poses of standing, sitting, and kneeling, these figures depict a
[113]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
wide range of actions, such as grinding grain, baking bread, producing pots, and
making music, and they are shown in appropriate poses, bending and squatting as
they carry out their tasks.
www.ZabanExam.com
[114]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Orientation and Navigation
To South Americans, robins are birds that fly north every spring. To North
Americans, the robins simply vacation in the south each winter. Furthermore, they
fly to very specific places in South America and will often come back to the same
trees in North American yards the following spring. The question is not why they
would leave the cold of winter so much as how they find their way around. The
question perplexed people for years, until, in the 1950s, a German scientist named
Gustave Kramer provided some answers and, in the process, raised new questions.
Kramer initiated important new kinds of research regarding how animals orient and
navigate. Orientation is simply facing in the right direction; navigation involves
finding ones way from point A to point B.
Early in his research, Kramer found that caged migratory birds became very
restless at about the time they would normally have begun migration in the wild.
Furthermore, he noticed that as they fluttered around in the cage, they often
launched themselves in the direction of their normal migratory route. He then set
up experiments with caged starlings and found that their orientation was, in fact, in
the proper migratory direction except when the sky was overcast, at which times
there was no clear direction to their restless movements. Kramer surmised,
therefore, that they were orienting according to the position of the Sun. To test this
idea, he blocked their view of the Sun and used mirrors to change its apparent
position. He found that under these circumstances, the birds oriented with respect
to the new "Sun." They seemed to be using the Sun as a compass to determine
direction. At the time, this idea seemed preposterous. How could a bird navigate by
the Sun when some of us lose our way with road maps? Obviously, more testing
was in order.
[115]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
So, in another set of experiments, Kramer put identical food boxes around the
cage, with food in only one of the boxes. The boxes were stationary, and the one
containing food was always at the same point of the compass. However, its
position with respect to the surroundings could be changed by revolving either the
inner cage containing the birds or the outer walls, which served as the
background. As long as the birds could see the Sun, no matter how their
surroundings were altered, they went directly to the correct food box. whether the
box appeared in front of the right wall or the left wall, they showed no signs of
confusion. On overcast days, however, the birds were disoriented and had trouble
locating their food box.
In experimenting with artificial suns, Kramer made another interesting discovery.
If the artificial Sun remained stationary, the birds would shift their direction with
respect to it at a rate of about 15 degrees per hour, the Sun's rate of movement
across the sky. Apparently, the birds were assuming that the "Sun" they saw was
moving at that rate. When the real Sun was visible, however, the birds maintained
a constant direction as it moved across the sky. In other words, they were able to
compensate for the Sun's movement. This meant that some sort of biological clock
was operating-and a very precise clock at that.
What about birds that migrate at night? Perhaps they navigate by the night sky. To
test the idea, caged night-migrating birds were placed on the floor of a planetarium
during their migratory period. A planetarium is essentially a theater with a
domelike ceiling onto which a night sky can be projected for any night of the year.
When the planetarium sky matched the sky outside, the birds fluttered in the
direction of their normal migration. But when the dome was rotated, the birds
changed their direction to match the artificial sky. The results clearly indicated that
the birds were orienting according to the stars.
[116]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
There is accumulating evidence indicating that birds navigate by using a wide
variety of environmental cues. Other areas under investigation include magnetism,
landmarks, coastlines, sonar, and even smells. The studies are complicated by the
fact that the data are sometimes contradictory and the mechanisms apparently
change from time to time. Furthermore, one sensory ability may back up another.
[117]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Begging by Nestlings
Many signals that animals make seem to impose on the signalers costs that are
overly damaging. A classic example is noisy begging by nestling songbirds when a
parent returns to the nest with food. These loud cheeps and peeps might give the
location of the nest away to a listening hawk or raccoon, resulting in the death of
the defenseless nestlings. In fact, when tapes of begging tree swallows were played
at an artificial swallow nest containing an egg, the egg in that “noisy” nest was
taken or destroyed by predators before the egg in a nearby quiet nest in 29 of 37
trials.
Further evidence for the costs of begging comes from a study of differences in the
begging calls of warbler species that nest on the ground versus those that nest in
the relative safety of trees. The young of ground-nesting warblers produce begging
cheeps of higher frequencies than do their tree-nesting relatives. These higher-
frequency sounds do not travel as far, and so may better conceal the individuals
producing them, who are especially vulnerable to predators in their ground nests.
David Haskell created artificial nests with clay eggs and placed them on the ground
beside a tape recorder that played the begging calls of either tree-nesting or of
ground-nesting warblers. The eggs “advertised” by the tree-nesters' begging calls
were found bitten significantly more often than the eggs associated with the
ground-nesters' calls.
The hypothesis that begging calls have evolved properties that reduce their
potential for attracting predators yields a prediction: baby birds of species that
experience high rates of nest predation should produce softer begging signals of
higher frequency than nestlings of other species less often victimized by nest
predators. This prediction was supported by data collected in one survey of 24
[118]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
species from an Arizona forest, more evidence that predator pressure favors the
evolution of begging calls that are hard to detect and pinpoint.
Given that predators can make it costly to beg for food, what benefit do begging
nestlings derive from their communications? One possibility is that a noisy baby
bird provides accurate signals of its real hunger and good health, making it
worthwhile for the listening parent to give it food in a nest where several other
offspring are usually available to be fed. If this hypothesis is true, then it follows
that nestlings should adjust the intensity of their signals in relation to the signals
produced by their nestmates, who are competing for parental attention. When
experimentally deprived baby robins are placed in a nest with normally fed
siblings, the hungry nestlings beg more loudly than usual—but so do their better-
fed siblings, though not as loudly as the hungrier birds.
If parent birds use begging intensity to direct food to healthy offspring capable of
vigorous begging, then parents should make food delivery decisions on the basis of
their offsprings’ calls. Indeed, if you take baby tree swallows out of a nest for an
hour feeding half the set and starving the other half, when the birds are replaced in
the nest, the starved youngsters beg more loudly than the fed birds, and the parent
birds feed the active beggars more than those who beg less vigorously.
As these experiments show, begging apparently provides a signal of need that
parents use to make judgments about which offspring can benefit most from a
feeding. But the question arises, why don't nestlings beg loudly when they aren't all
that hungry? By doing so, they could possibly secure more food, which should
result in more rapid growth or larger size, either of which is advantageous. The
answer lies apparently not in the increased energy costs of exaggerated begging—
such energy costs are small relative to the potential gain in calories—but rather in
the damage that any successful cheater would do to its siblings, which share genes
[119]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
with one another. An individual's success in propagating his or her genes can be
affected by more than just his or her own personal reproductive success. Because
close relatives have many of the same genes, animals that harm their close relatives
may in effect be destroying some of their own genes. Therefore, a begging nestling
that secures food at the expense of its siblings might actually leave behind fewer
copies of its genes overall than it might otherwise.
[120]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 12
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[121]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Which Hand Did They Use?
We all know that many more people today are right-handed than left-handed. Can
one trace this same pattern far back in prehistory? Much of the evidence about
right-hand versus left-hand dominance comes from stencils and prints found in
rock shelters in Australia and elsewhere, and in many Ice Age caves in France,
Spain, and Tasmania. When a left hand has been stenciled, this implies that the
artist was right-handed, and vice versa. Even though the paint was often sprayed on
by mouth, one can assume that the dominant hand assisted in the operation. One
also has to make the assumption that hands were stenciled palm downward—a left
hand stenciled palm upward might of course look as if it were a right hand. Of 158
stencils in the French cave of Gargas, 136 have been identified as left, and only 22
as right; right-handedness was therefore heavily predominant.
Cave art furnishes other types of evidence of this phenomenon. Most engravings,
for example, are best lit from the left, as befits the work of right-handed artists,
who generally prefer to have the light source on the left so that the shadow of their
hand does not fall on the tip of the engraving tool or brush. In the few cases where
an Ice Age figure is depicted holding something, it is mostly, though not always, in
the right hand.
Clues to right-handedness can also be found by other methods. Right-handers tend
to have longer, stronger, and more muscular bones on the right side, and Marcellin
Boule as long ago as 1911 noted the La Chapelle-aux-Saints Neanderthal skeleton
had a right upper arm bone that was noticeably stronger than the left. Similar
observations have been made on other Neanderthal skeletons such as La Ferrassie I
and Neanderthal itself.
[122]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Fractures and other cut marks are another source of evidence. Right-handed
soldiers tend to be wounded on the left. The skeleton of a 40- or 50-year-old
Nabatean warrior, buried 2,000 years ago in the Negev Desert, Israel, had multiple
healed fractures to the skull, the left arm, and the ribs.
Tools themselves can be revealing. Long-handed Neolithic spoons of yew wood
preserved in Alpine villages dating to 3000 B.C. have survived; the signs of
rubbing on their left side indicate that their users were right-handed. The late Ice
Age rope found in the French cave of Lascaux consists of fibers spiraling to the
right, and was therefore tressed by a righthander.
Occasionally one can determine whether stone tools were used in the right hand or
the left, and it is even possible to assess how far back this feature can be traced. In
stone toolmaking experiments, Nick Toth, a right-hander, held the core (the stone
that would become the tool) in his left hand and the hammer stone in his right. As
the tool was made, the core was rotated clockwise, and the flakes, removed in
sequence, had a little crescent of cortex (the core's outer surface) on the side. Toth's
knapping produced 56 percent flakes with the cortex on the right, and 44 percent
left-oriented flakes. A left-handed toolmaker would produce the opposite pattern.
Toth has applied these criteria to the similarly made pebble tools from a number of
early sites (before 1.5 million years) at Koobi Fora, Kenya, probably made by
Homo habilis. At seven sites he found that 57 percent of the flakes were right-
oriented, and 43 percent left, a pattern almost identical to that produced today.
About 90 percent of modern humans are right-handed: we are the only mammal
with a preferential use of one hand. The part of the brain responsible for fine
control and movement is located in the left cerebral hemisphere, and the findings
above suggest that the human brain was already asymmetrical in its structure and
function not long after 2 million years ago. Among Neanderthalers of 70,000–
[123]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
35,000 years ago, Marcellin Boule noted that the La Chapelle-aux-Saints
individual had a left hemisphere slightly bigger than the right, and the same was
found for brains of specimens from Neanderthal, Gibraltar, and La Quina.
www.ZabanExam.com
[124]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Transition to Sound in Film
The shift from silent to sound film at the end of the 1920s marks, so far, the most
important transformation in motion picture history. Despite all the highly visible
technological developments in theatrical and home delivery of the moving image
that have occurred over the decades since then, no single innovation has come
close to being regarded as a similar kind of watershed. In nearly every language,
however the words are phrased, the most basic division in cinema history lies
between films that are mute and films that speak.
Yet this most fundamental standard of historical periodization conceals a host
of paradoxes. Nearly every movie theater, however modest, had a piano or organ to
provide musical accompaniment to silent pictures. In many instances, spectators in
the era before recorded sound experienced elaborate aural presentations alongside
movies' visual images, from the Japanese benshi (narrators) crafting multivoiced
dialogue narratives to original musical compositions performed by symphony-size
orchestras in Europe and the United States. In Berlin, for the premiere performance
outside the Soviet Union of The Battleship Potemkin, film director Sergei
Eisenstein worked with Austrian composer Edmund Meisel (1874-1930) on a
musical score matching sound to image; the Berlin screenings with live music
helped to bring the film its wide international fame.
Beyond that, the triumph of recorded sound has overshadowed the rich diversity of
technological and aesthetic experiments with the visual image that were going
forward simultaneously in the 1920s. New color processes, larger or differently
shaped screen sizes, multiple-screen projections, even television, were among the
developments invented or tried out during the period, sometimes with startling
success. The high costs of converting to sound and the early limitations of sound
[125]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
technology were among the factors that suppressed innovations or retarded
advancement in these other areas. The introduction of new screen formats was put
off for a quarter century, and color, though utilized over the next two decades for
special productions, also did not become a norm until the 1950s.
Though it may be difficult to imagine from a later perspective, a strain of critical
opinion in the 1920s predicted that sound film would be a technical novelty that
would soon fade from sight, just as had many previous attempts, dating well back
before the First World War, to link images with recorded sound. These critics were
making a common assumption—that the technological inadequacies of earlier
efforts (poor synchronization, weak sound amplification, fragile sound recordings)
would invariably occur again. To be sure, their evaluation of the technical flaws in
1920s sound experiments was not so far off the mark, yet they neglected to take
into account important new forces in the motion picture field that, in a sense,
would not take no for an answer.
These forces were the rapidly expanding electronics and telecommunications
companies that were developing and linking telephone and wireless technologies in
the 1920s. In the United States, they included such firms as American Telephone
and Telegraph, General Electric, and Westinghouse. They were interested in all
forms of sound technology and all potential avenues for commercial exploitation.
Their competition and collaboration were creating the broadcasting industry in the
United States, beginning with the introduction of commercial radio programming
in the early 1920s. With financial assets considerably greater than those in the
motion picture industry, and perhaps a wider vision of the relationships among
entertainment and communications media, they revitalized research into recording
sound for motion pictures.
[126]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
In 1929 the United States motion picture industry released more than 300 sound
films—a rough figure, since a number were silent films with music tracks, or films
prepared in dual versions, to take account of the many cinemas not yet wired for
sound. At the production level, in the United States the conversion was virtually
complete by 1930. In Europe it took a little longer, mainly because there were
more small producers for whom the costs of sound were prohibitive, and in other
parts of the world problems with rights or access to equipment delayed the shift to
sound production for a few more years (though cinemas in major cities may have
been wired in order to play foreign sound films). The triumph of sound cinema was
swift, complete, and enormously popular.
[127]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Water in the Desert
Rainfall is not completely absent in desert areas, but it is highly variable. An
annual rainfall of four inches is often used to define the limits of a desert. The
impact of rainfall upon the surface water and groundwater resources of the desert is
greatly influenced by landforms. Flats and depressions where water can collect are
common features, but they make up only a small part of the landscape.
Arid lands, surprisingly, contain some of the world’s largest river systems, such as
the Murray-Darling in Australia, the Rio Grande in North America, the Indus in
Asia, and the Nile in Africa. These rivers and river systems are known as
"exogenous" because their sources lie outside the arid zone. They are vital for
sustaining life in some of the driest parts of the world. For centuries, the annual
floods of the Nile, Tigris, and Euphrates, for example, have brought fertile silts and
water to the inhabitants of their lower valleys. Today, river discharges are
increasingly controlled by human intervention, creating a need for international
river-basin agreements. The filling of the Ataturk and other dams in Turkey
has drastically reduced flows in the Euphrates, with potentially serious
consequences for Syria and Iraq.
The flow of exogenous rivers varies with the season. The desert sections of long
rivers respond several months after rain has fallen outside the desert, so that peak
flows may be in the dry season. This is useful for irrigation, but the high
temperatures, low humidities, and different day lengths of the dry season,
compared to the normal growing season, can present difficulties with some crops.
Regularly flowing rivers and streams that originate within arid lands are known as
"endogenous." These are generally fed by groundwater springs, and many issue
from limestone massifs, such as the Atlas Mountains in Morocco. Basaltic rocks
[128]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
also support springs, notably at the Jabal Al-Arab on the Jordan-Syria
border. Endogenous rivers often do not reach the sea but drain into inland basins,
where the water evaporates or is lost in the ground. Most desert streambeds are
normally dry, but they occasionally receive large flows of water and sediment.
Deserts contain large amounts of groundwater when compared to the amounts they
hold in surface stores such as lakes and rivers.But only a small fraction of
groundwater enters the hydrological cycle—feeding the flows of streams,
maintaining lake levels, and being recharged (or refilled) through surface flows
and rainwater. In recent years, groundwater has become an increasingly important
source of freshwater for desert dwellers. The United Nations Environment Program
and the World Bank have funded attempts to survey the groundwater resources of
arid lands and to develop appropriate extraction techniques. Such programs are
much needed because in many arid lands there is only a vague idea of the extent of
groundwater resources. It is known, however, that the distribution of groundwater
is uneven, and that much of it lies at great depths.
Groundwater is stored in the pore spaces and joints of rocks and unconsolidated
(unsolidified) sediments or in the openings widened through fractures and
weathering. The water-saturated rock or sediment is known as an "aquifer".
Because they are porous, sedimentary rocks, such as sandstones and
conglomerates, are important potential sources of groundwater. Large quantities of
water may also be stored in limestones when joints and cracks have been enlarged
to form cavities. Most limestone and sandstone aquifers are deep and extensive but
may contain groundwaters that are not being recharged. Most shallow aquifers in
sand and gravel deposits produce lower yields, but they can be rapidly recharged.
Some deep aquifers are known as "fossil waters. The term "fossil" describes water
[129]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
that has been present for several thousand years. These aquifers became saturated
more than 10,000 years ago and are no longer being recharged.
Water does not remain immobile in an aquifer but can seep out at springs or leak
into other aquifers. The rate of movement may be very slow: in the Indus plain, the
movement of saline (salty) groundwaters has still not reached equilibrium after 70
years of being tapped. The mineral content of groundwater normally increases with
the depth, but even quite shallow aquifers can be highly saline.
[130]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 13
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[131]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Types of Social Groups
Life places us in a complex web of relationships with other people. Our humanness
arises out of these relationships in the course of social interaction. Moreover, our
humanness must be sustained through social interaction—and fairly constantly so.
When an association continues long enough for two people to become linked
together by a relatively stable set of expectations, it is called a relationship.
People are bound within relationships by two types of bonds: expressive ties and
instrumental ties. Expressive ties are social links formed when we emotionally
invest ourselves in and commit ourselves to other people. Through association with
people who are meaningful to us, we achieve a sense of security, love, acceptance,
companionship, and personal worth. Instrumental ties are social links formed when
we cooperate with other people to achieve some goal. Occasionally, this may mean
working with instead of against competitors. More often, we simply cooperate with
others to reach some end without endowing the relationship with any larger
significance.
Sociologists have built on the distinction between expressive and instrumental ties
to distinguish between two types of groups: primary and secondary. A primary
group involves two or more people who enjoy a direct, intimate, cohesive
relationship with one another. Expressive ties predominate in primary groups; we
view the people as ends in themselves and valuable in their own right. A secondary
group entails two or more people who are involved in an impersonal relationship
and have come together for a specific, practical purpose. Instrumental ties
predominate in secondary groups; we perceive people as means to ends rather than
as ends in their own right. Sometimes primary group relationships evolve out of
secondary group relationships. This happens in many work settings. People on the
[132]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
job often develop close relationships with coworkers as they come to share gripes,
jokes, gossip, and satisfactions.
A number of conditions enhance the likelihood that primary groups will arise.
First, group size is important. We find it difficult to get to know people personally
when they are milling about and dispersed in large groups. In small groups we
have a better chance to initiate contact and establish rapport with them. Second,
face-to-face contact allows us to size up others. Seeing and talking with one
another in close physical proximity makes possible a subtle exchange of ideas and
feelings. And third, the probability that we will develop primary group bonds
increases as we have frequent and continuous contact. Our ties with people often
deepen as we interact with them across time and gradually evolve interlocking
habits and interests.
Primary groups are fundamental to us and to society. First, primary groups are
critical to the socialization process. Within them, infants and children are
introduced to the ways of their society. Such groups are the breeding grounds in
which we acquire the norms and values that equip us for social life. Sociologists
view primary groups as bridges between individuals and the larger society because
they transmit, mediate, and interpret a society's cultural patterns and provide the
sense of oneness so critical for social solidarity.
Second, primary groups are fundamental because they provide the settings in
which we meet most of our personal needs. Within them, we experience
companionship, love, security, and an overall sense of well-being. Not
surprisingly, sociologists find that the strength of a group's primary ties has
implications for the group's functioning. For example, the stronger the primary
group ties of a sports team playing together, the better their record is.
[133]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Third, primary groups are fundamental because they serve as powerful instruments
for social control. Their members command and dispense many of the rewards that
are so vital to us and that make our lives seem worthwhile. Should the use of
rewards fail, members can frequently win by rejecting or threatening to ostracize
those who deviate from the primary group's norms. For instance, some social
groups employ shunning (a person can remain in the community, but others are
forbidden to interact with the person) as a device to bring into line individuals
whose behavior goes beyond that allowed by the particular group. Even more
important, primary groups define social reality for us by structuring our
experiences. By providing us with definitions of situations, they elicit from our
behavior that conforms to group-devised meanings. Primary groups, then, serve
both as carriers of social norms and as enforcers of them.
www.ZabanExam.com
[134]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Biological Clocks
Survival and successful reproduction usually require the activities of animals to be
coordinated with predictable events around them. Consequently, the timing and
rhythms of biological functions must closely match periodic events like the solar
day, the tides, the lunar cycle, and the seasons. The relations between animal
activity and these periods, particularly for the daily rhythms, have been of such
interest and importance that a huge amount of work has been done on them and the
special research field of chronobiology has emerged. Normally, the constantly
changing levels of an animal's activity—sleeping, feeding, moving, reproducing,
metabolizing, and producing enzymes and hormones, for example—are well
coordinated with environmental rhythms, but the key question is whether the
animal's schedule is driven by external cues, such as sunrise or sunset, or is instead
dependent somehow on internal timers that themselves generate the observed
biological rhythms. Almost universally, biologists accept the idea that all
eukaryotes (a category that includes most organisms except bacteria and certain
algae) have internal clocks. By isolating organisms completely from external
periodic cues, biologists learned that organisms have internal clocks. For instance,
apparently normal daily periods of biological activity were maintained for about a
week by the fungus Neurospora when it was intentionally isolated from all
geophysical timing cues while orbiting in a space shuttle. The continuation of
biological rhythms in an organism without external cues attests to its having an
internal clock.
When crayfish are kept continuously in the dark, even for four to five months, their
compound eyes continue to adjust on a daily schedule for daytime and nighttime
vision. Horseshoe crabs kept in the dark continuously for a year were found to
[135]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
maintain a persistent rhythm of brain activity that similarly adapts their eyes on a
daily schedule for bright or for weak light. Like almost all daily cycles of animals
deprived of environmental cues, those measured for the horseshoe crabs in these
conditions were not exactly 24 hours. Such a rhythm whose period is
approximately—but not exactly—a day is called circadian. For different individual
horseshoe crabs, the circadian period ranged from 22.2 to 25.5 hours. A particular
animal typically maintains its own characteristic cycle duration with great
precision for many days. Indeed, stability of the biological clock's period is one of
its major features, even when the organism's environment is subjected to
considerable changes in factors, such as temperature, that would be expected to
affect biological activity strongly. Further evidence for persistent internal rhythms
appears when the usual external cycles are shifted—either experimentally or by
rapid east-west travel over great distances. Typically, the animal's daily internally
generated cycle of activity continues without change. As a result, its activities are
shifted relative to the external cycle of the new environment. The disorienting
effects of this mismatch between external time cues and internal schedules may
persist, like our jet lag, for several days or weeks until certain cues such as the
daylight/darkness cycle reset the organism's clock to synchronize with the daily
rhythm of the new environment.
Animals need natural periodic signals like sunrise to maintain a cycle whose period
is precisely 24 hours. Such an external cue not only coordinates an animal's daily
rhythms with particular features of the local solar day but also—
because it normally does so day after day-seems to keep the internal clock's period
close to that of Earth's rotation. Yet despite this synchronization of the period of
the internal cycle, the animal's timer itself continues to have its own genetically
built-in period close to, but different from, 24 hours. Without the external cue, the
[136]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
difference accumulates and so the internally regulated activities of the biological
day drift continuously, like the tides, in relation to the solar day. This drift has been
studied extensively in many animals and in biological activities ranging from the
hatching of fruit fly eggs to wheel running by squirrels. Light has a predominating
influence in setting the clock. Even a fifteen-minute burst of light in
otherwise sustaineddarkness can reset an animal's circadian rhythm. Normally,
internal rhythms are kept in step by regular environmental cycles. For instance, if a
homing pigeon is to navigate with its Sun compass, its clock must be properly set
by cues provided by the daylight/darkness cycle.
[137]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Methods of Studying Infant Perception
In the study of perceptual abilities of infants, a number of techniques are used to
determine infants' responses to various stimuli. Because they cannot verbalize or
fill out questionnaires, indirect techniques of naturalistic observation are used as
the primary means of determining what infants can see, hear, feel, and so forth.
Each of these methods compares an infant's state prior to the introduction of a
stimulus with its state during or immediately following the stimulus. The
difference between the two measures provides the researcher with an indication of
the level and duration of the response to the stimulus. For example, if
a uniformly moving pattern of some sort is passed across the visual field of a
neonate (newborn), repetitive following movements of the eye occur. The
occurrence of these eye movements provides evidence that the moving pattern is
perceived at some level by the newborn. Similarly, changes in the infant's general
level of motor activity —turning the head, blinking the eyes, crying, and so forth
— have been used by researchers as visual indicators of the infant's perceptual
abilities.
Such techniques, however, have limitations. First, the observation may be
unreliable in that two or more observers may not agree that the particular response
occurred, or to what degree it occurred. Second, responses are difficult to quantify.
Often the rapid and diffuse movements of the infant make it difficult to get an
accurate record of the number of responses. The third, and most potent, limitation
is that it is not possible to be certain that the infant's response was due to the
stimulus presented or to a change from no stimulus to a stimulus. The infant may
be responding to aspects of the stimulus different than those identified by the
investigator. Therefore, when observational assessment is used as a technique for
[138]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
studying infant perceptual abilities, care must be taken not to overgeneralize from
the data or to rely on one or two studies as conclusive evidence of a particular
perceptual ability of the infant.
Observational assessment techniques have become much more sophisticated,
reducing the limitations just presented. Film analysis of the infant's responses,
heart and respiration rate monitors, and nonnutritive sucking devices are used as
effective tools in understanding infant perception. Film analysis permits
researchers to carefully study the infant's responses over and over and in slow
motion. Precise measurements can be made of the length and frequency of the
infant's attention between two stimuli. Heart and respiration monitors provide the
investigator with the number of heartbeats or breaths taken when a new stimulus is
presented. Numerical increases are used as quantifiableindicators of heightened
interest in the new stimulus. Increases in nonnutritive sucking were first used as an
assessment measure by researchers in 1969. They devised an apparatus that
connected a baby's pacifier to a counting device. As stimuli were presented,
changes in the infant's sucking behavior were recorded. Increases in the number of
sucks were used as an indicator of the infant's attention to or preference for a given
visual display.
Two additional techniques of studying infant perception have come into vogue.
The first is the habituation-dishabituation technique, in which a single stimulus is
presented repeatedly to the infant until there is a measurable decline (habituation)
in whatever attending behavior is being observed. At that point a new stimulus is
presented, and any recovery (dishabituation) in responsiveness is recorded. If the
infant fails to dishabituate and continues to show habituation with the new
stimulus, it is assumed that the baby is unable to perceive the new stimulus as
different. The habituation-dishabituation paradigm has been used most extensively
[139]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
with studies of auditory and olfactory perception in infants. The second technique
relies on evoked potentials, which are electrical brain responses that may be related
to a particular stimulus because of where they originate. Changes in the electrical
pattern of the brain indicate that the stimulus is getting through to the infant's
central nervous system and eliciting some form of response.
Each of the preceding techniques provides the researcher with evidence that the
infant can detect or discriminate between stimuli. With these sophisticated
observational assessment and electro-physiological measures, we know that the
neonate of only a few days is far more perceptive than previously suspected.
However, these measures are only "indirect" indicators of the infant's perceptual
abilities.
www.ZabanExam.com
[140]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 14
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[141]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Children and Advertising
Young children are trusting of commercial advertisements in the media, and
advertisers have sometimes been accused of taking advantage of this trusting
outlook. The Independent Television Commission, regulator of television
advertising in the United Kingdom, has criticized advertisers for
"misleadingness"—creating a wrong impression either intentionally or
unintentionally—in an effort to control advertisers' use of techniques that make it
difficult for children to judge the true size, action, performance, or construction of
a toy.
General concern about misleading tactics that advertisers employ is centered on the
use of exaggeration. Consumer protection groups and parents believe that children
are largely ill-equipped to recognize such techniques and that often exaggeration is
used at the expense of product information. Claims such as "the best" or "better
than" can be subjective and misleading; even adults may be unsure as to their
meaning. They represent the advertiser's opinions about the qualities of their
products or brand and, as a consequence, are difficult to verify. Advertisers
sometimes offset or counterbalance an exaggerated claim with a disclaimer—a
qualification or condition on the claim. For example, the claim that breakfast cereal
has a health benefit may be accompanied by the disclaimer "when part of a
nutritionally balanced breakfast." However, research has shown that children often
have difficulty understanding disclaimers: children may interpret the phrase "when
part of a nutritionally balanced breakfast" to mean that the cereal is required as a
necessary part of a balanced breakfast. The author George Comstock suggested
that less than a quarter of children between the ages of six and eight years old
understood standard disclaimers used in many toy advertisements and that
[142]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
disclaimers are more readily comprehended when presented in both audio and
visual formats. Nevertheless, disclaimers are mainly presented in audio format
only.
Fantasy is one of the more common techniques in advertising that could possibly
mislead a young audience. Child-oriented advertisements are more likely to
include magic and fantasy than advertisements aimed at adults. In a content
analysis of Canadian television, the author Stephen Kline observed that nearly all
commercials for character toys featured fantasy play. Children have strong
imaginations and the use of fantasy brings their ideas to life, but children may not
be adept enough to realize that what they are viewing is unreal. Fantasy situations
and settings are frequently used to attract children's attention, particularly in food
advertising. Advertisements for breakfast cereals have, for many years, been found
to be especially fond of fantasy techniques, with almost nine out of ten including
such content. Generally, there is uncertainty as to whether very young children can
distinguish between fantasy and reality in advertising. Certainly, rational appeals in
advertising aimed at children are limited, as most advertisements use emotional
and indirect appeals to psychological states or associations.
The use of celebrities such as singers and movie stars is common in advertising.
The intention is for the positively perceived attributes of the celebrity to be
transferred to the advertised product and for the two to become automatically
linked in the audience's mind. In children's advertising, the "celebrities" are often
animated figures from popular cartoons. In the recent past, the role of celebrities in
advertising to children has often been conflated with the concept of host selling.
Host selling involves blending advertisements with regular programming in a way
that makes it difficult to distinguish one from the other. Host selling occurs, for
example, when a children's show about a cartoon lion contains an ad in which the
[143]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
same lion promotes a breakfast cereal. The psychologist Dale Kunkel showed that
the practice of host selling reduced children's ability to distinguish between
advertising and program material. It was also found that older children responded
more positively to products in host selling advertisements.
Regarding the appearance of celebrities in advertisements that do not involve host
selling, the evidence is mixed. Researcher Charles Atkin found that children
believe that the characters used to advertise breakfast cereals are knowledgeable
about cereals, and children accept such characters as credible sources of nutritional
information. This finding was even more marked for heavy viewers of television.
In addition, children feel validated in their choice of a product when a celebrity
endorses that product. A study of children in Hong Kong, however, found that the
presence of celebrities in advertisements could negatively affect the children's
perceptions of a product if the children did not like the celebrity in question.
[144]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Maya Water Problems
To understand the ancient Mayan people who lived in the area that is today
southern Mexico and Central America and the ecological difficulties they faced,
one must first consider their environment, which we think of as "jungle" or
"tropical rainforest." This view is inaccurate, and the reason proves to be
important. Properly speaking, tropical rainforests grow in high-rainfall equatorial
areas that remain wet or humid all year round. But the Maya homeland lies more
than sixteen hundred kilometers from the equator, at latitudes 17 to 22 degrees
north, in a habitat termed a "seasonal tropical forest." That is, while there does tend
to be a rainy season from May to October, there is also a dry season from January
through April. If one focuses on the wet months, one calls the Maya homeland a
"seasonal tropical forest"; if one focuses on the dry months, one could instead
describe it as a "seasonal desert."
From north to south in the Yucatan Peninsula, where the Maya lived, rainfall
ranges from 18 to 100 inches (457 to 2,540 millimeters) per year, and the soils
become thicker, so that the southern peninsula was agriculturally more productive
and supported denser populations. But rainfall in the Maya homeland is
unpredictably variable between years; some recent years have had three or four
times more rain than other years. As a result, modern farmers attempting to grow
corn in the ancient Maya homelands have faced frequent crop failures, especially
in the north. The ancient Maya were presumably more experienced and did better,
but nevertheless they too must have faced risks of crop failures from droughts and
hurricanes.
Although southern Maya areas received more rainfall than northern areas,
problems of water were paradoxically more severe in the wet south. While that
[145]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
made things hard for ancient Maya living in the south, it has also made things hard
for modern archaeologists who have difficulty understanding why ancient droughts
caused bigger problems in the wet south than in the dry north. The likely
explanation is that an area of underground freshwater underlies the Yucatan
Peninsula, but surface elevation increases from north to south, so that as one moves
south the land surface lies increasingly higher above the water table. In the
northern peninsula the elevation is sufficiently low that the ancient Maya were able
to reach the water table at deep sinkholes called cenotes, or at deep caves. In low-
elevation north coastal areas without sinkholes, the Maya would have been able to
get down to the water table by digging wells up to 75 feet (22 meters) deep. But
much of the south lies too high above the water table for cenotes or wells to reach
down to it. Making matters worse, most of the Yucatan Peninsula consists of karst,
a porous sponge-like limestone terrain where rain runs straight into the ground and
where little or no surface water remains available.
How did those dense southern Maya populations deal with the resulting water
problem? It initially surprises us that many of their cities were not built next to the
rivers but instead on high terrain in rolling uplands. The explanation is that the
Maya excavated depressions, or modified natural depressions, and then plugged up
leaks in the karst by plastering the bottoms of the depressions in order to create
reservoirs, which collected rain from large plastered catchment basins and stored it
for use in the dry season. For example, reservoirs at the Maya city of Tikal held
enough water to meet the drinking water needs of about 10,000 people for a period
of 18 months. At the city of Coba the Maya built dikes around a lake in order to
raise its level and make their water supply more reliable. But the inhabitants of
Tikal and other cities dependent on reservoirs for drinking water would still have
been in deep trouble if 18 months passed without rain in a prolonged drought. A
[146]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
shorter drought in which they exhausted their stored food supplies might already
have gotten them in deep trouble, because growing crops required rain rather than
reservoirs.
[147]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Pastoralism in Ancient Inner Eurasia
Pastoralism is a lifestyle in which economic activity is based primarily on
livestock. Archaeological evidence suggests that by 3000 B.C., and perhaps even
earlier, there had emerged on the steppes of Inner Eurasia the distinctive types of
pastoralism that were to dominate the region's history for several millennia. Here,
the horse was already becoming the animal of prestige in many regions, though
sheep, goats, and cattle could also play a vital role. It is the use of horses for
transportation and warfare that explains why Inner Eurasian pastoralism proved the
most mobile and the most militaristic of all major forms of pastoralism. The
emergence and spread of pastoralism had a profoundimpact on the history of Inner
Eurasia, and also, indirectly, on the parts of Asia and Europe just outside this area.
In particular, pastoralism favors a mobile lifestyle, and this mobility helps to
explain the impact of pastoralist societies on this part of the world.
The mobility of pastoralist societies reflects their dependence on animal-based
foods. While agriculturalists rely on domesticated plants, pastoralists rely on
domesticated animals. As a result, pastoralists, like carnivores in general, occupy a
higher position on the food chain. All else being equal, this means they must
exploit larger areas of land than do agriculturalists to secure the same amount of
food, clothing, and other necessities. So pastoralism is a more extensive lifeway
than farming is. However, the larger the terrain used to support a group, the harder
it is to exploit that terrain while remaining in one place. So, basic ecological
principles imply a strong tendency within pastoralist lifeways toward nomadism (a
mobile lifestyle). As the archaeologist Roger Cribb puts it, “The greater the degree
of pastoralism, the stronger the tendency toward nomadism.” A modern Turkic
[148]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
nomad interviewed by Cribb commented: "The more animals you have, the farther
you have to move."
Nomadism has further consequences. It means that pastoralist societies occupy and
can influence very large territories. This is particularly true of the horse
pastoralism that emerged in the Inner Eurasian steppes, for this was the most
mobile of all major forms of pastoralism. So, it is no accident that with the
appearance of pastoralist societies there appear large areas that share similar
cultural, ecological, and even linguistic features. By the late fourth millennium
B.C., there is already evidence of large culture zones reaching from Eastern Europe
to the western borders of Mongolia. Perhaps the most striking sign of mobility is
the fact that by the third millennium B.C., most pastoralists in this huge region
spoke related languages ancestral to the modern Indo-European languages. The
remarkable mobility and range of pastoral societies explain, in part, why so many
linguists have argued that the Indo-European languages began their astonishing
expansionist career not among farmers in Anatolia (present-day Turkey), but
among early pastoralists from Inner Eurasia. Such theories imply that the Indo-
European languages evolved not in Neolithic (10,000 to 3,000 B.C.) Anatolia, but
among the foraging communities of the cultures in the region of the Don and
Dnieper rivers, which took up stock breeding and began to exploit the neighboring
steppes.
Nomadism also subjects pastoralist communities to strict rules of portability. If you
are constantly on the move, you cannot afford to accumulate large material
surpluses. Such rules limit variations in accumulated material goods between
pastoralist households (though they may also encourage a taste for portable goods
of high value such as silks or jewelry). So, by and large, nomadism implies a high
degree of self-sufficiency and inhibits the appearance of an extensive division of
[149]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
labor. Inequalities of wealth and rank certainly exist, and have probably existed in
most pastoralist societies, but except in periods of military conquest, they are
normally too slight to generate the stable, hereditary hierarchies that are usually
implied by the use of the term class. Inequalities of gender have also existed in
pastoralist societies, but they seem to have been softened by the absence of steep
hierarchies of wealth in most communities, and also by the requirement that
women acquire most of the skills of men, including, often, their military skills.
[150]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 15
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[151]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
A Warm-Blooded Turtle
When it comes to physiology, the leatherback turtle is, in some ways, more like a
reptilian whale than a turtle. It swims farther into the cold of the northern and
southern oceans than any other sea turtle, and it deals with the chilly waters in a
way unique among reptiles.
A warm-blooded turtle may seem to be a contradiction in terms. Nonetheless, an
adult leatherback can maintain a body temperature of between 25 and 26°C (77-
79°F) in seawater that is only 8°C (46.4°F). Accomplishing this feat requires
adaptations both to generate heat in the turtle’s body and to keep it from escaping
into the surrounding waters. Leatherbacks apparently do not generate internal heat
the way we do, or the way birds do, as a by-product of cellular metabolism. A
leatherback may be able to pick up some body heat by basking at the surface; its
dark, almost black body color may help it to absorb solar radiation. However, most
of its internal heat comes from the action of its muscles.
Leatherbacks keep their body heat in three different ways. The first, and simplest,
is size. The bigger the animal is, the lower its surface-to-volume ratio; for every
ounce of body mass, there is proportionately less surface through which heat can
escape. An adult leatherback is twice the size of the biggest cheloniid sea turtles
and will therefore take longer to cool off. Maintaining a high body temperature
through sheer bulk is called gigantothermy. It works for elephants, for whales, and,
perhaps, it worked for many of the larger dinosaurs. It apparently works, in a
smaller way, for some other sea turtles. Large loggerhead and green turtles can
maintain their body temperature at a degree or two above that of the surrounding
water, and gigantothermy is probably the way they do it. Muscular activity helps,
[152]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
too, and an actively swimming green turtle may be 7°C (12.6°F) warmer than the
waters it swims through.
Gigantothermy, though, would not be enough to keep a leatherback warm in cold
northern waters. It is not enough for whales, which supplement it with a thick layer
of insulating blubber (fat). Leatherbacks do not have blubber, but they do have a
reptilian equivalent: thick, oil-saturated skin, with a layer of fibrous, fatty tissue
just beneath it. Insulation protects the leatherback everywhere but on its head and
flippers. Because the flippers are comparatively thin and blade-like, they are the
one part of the leatherback that is likely to become chilled. There is not much that
the turtle can do about this without compromising the aerodynamic shape of the
flipper. The problem is that as blood flows through the turtle’s flippers, it risks
losing enough heat to lower the animal’s central body temperature when it returns.
The solution is to allow the flippers to cool down without drawing heat away from
the rest of the turtle’s body. The leatherback accomplishes this by arranging the
blood vessels in the base of its flipper into a countercurrent exchange system.
In a countercurrent exchange system, the blood vessels carrying cooled blood from
the flippers run close enough to the blood vessels carrying warm blood from the
body to pick up some heat from the warmer blood vessels; thus, the heat is
transferred from the outgoing to the ingoing vessels before it reaches the flipper
itself. This is the same arrangement found in an old-fashioned steam radiator, in
which the coiled pipes pass heat back and forth as water courses through them. The
leatherback is certainly not the only animal with such an arrangement; gulls have a
countercurrent exchange in their legs. That is why a gull can stand on an ice floe
without freezing.
All this applies, of course, only to an adult leatherback. Hatchlings are simply too
small to conserve body heat, even with insulation and countercurrent exchange
[153]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
systems. We do not know how old, or how large, a leatherback has to be before it
can switch from a cold-blooded to a warm-blooded mode of life. Leatherbacks
reach their immense size in a much shorter time than it takes other sea turtles to
grow. Perhaps their rush to adulthood is driven by a simple need to keep warm.
www.ZabanExam.com
[154]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Mass Extinctions
Cases in which many species become extinct within a geologically short interval of
time are called mass extinctions. There was one such event at the end of the
Cretaceous period (around 70 million years ago). There was another, even larger,
mass extinction at the end of the Permian period (around 250 million years
ago). The Permian event has attracted much less attention than other mass
extinctions because mostly unfamiliar species perished at that time.
The fossil record shows at least five mass extinctions in which many families of
marine organisms died out. The rates of extinction happening today are as great as
the rates during these mass extinctions. Many scientists have therefore concluded
that a sixth great mass extinction is currently in progress.
What could cause such high rates of extinction? There are several hypotheses,
including warming or cooling of Earth, changes in seasonal fluctuations or ocean
currents, and changing positions of the continents. Biological hypotheses include
ecological changes brought about by the evolution of cooperation between insects
and flowering plants or of bottom-feeding predators in the oceans. Some of the
proposed mechanisms required a very brief period during which all extinctions
suddenly took place; other mechanisms would be more likely to have taken place
more gradually, over an extended period, or at different times on different
continents. Some hypotheses fail to account for simultaneous extinctions on land
and in the seas. Each mass extinction may have had a different cause. Evidence
points to hunting by humans and habitat destruction as the likely causes for the
current mass extinction.
American paleontologists David Raup and John Sepkoski, who have studied
extinction rates in a number of fossil groups, suggest that episodes of increased
[155]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
extinction have recurred periodically, approximately every 26 million years since
the mid-Cretaceous period.The late Cretaceous extinction of the dinosaurs and
ammonoids was just one of the more drastic in a whole series of such recurrent
extinction episodes. The possibility that mass extinctions may recur periodically
has given rise to such hypotheses as that of a companion star with a long-period
orbit deflecting other bodies from their normal orbits, making some of them fall to
Earth as meteors and causing widespread devastation upon impact.
Of the various hypotheses attempting to account for the late Cretaceous
extinctions, the one that has attracted the most attention in recent years is the
asteroid-impact hypothesis first suggested by Luis and Walter Alvarez. According
to this hypothesis, Earth collided with an asteroid with an estimated diameter of 10
kilometers, or with several asteroids, the combined mass of which was comparable.
The force of collision spewed large amounts of debris into the atmosphere,
darkening the skies for several years before the finer particles settled. The reduced
level of photosynthesis led to a massive decline in plant life of all kinds, and this
caused massive starvation first of herbivores and subsequently of carnivores. The
mass extinction would have occurred very suddenly under this hypothesis.
One interesting test of the Alvarez hypothesis is based on the presence of the rare-
earth element iridium (Ir). Earth’s crust contains very little of this element, but
most asteroids contain a lot more. Debris thrown into the atmosphere by an
asteroid collision would presumably contain large amounts of iridium, and
atmospheric currents would carry this material all over the globe. A search of
sedimentary deposits that span the boundary between the Cretaceous and Tertiary
periods shows that there is a dramatic increase in the abundance of iridium briefly
and precisely at this boundary. This iridium anomaly offers strong support for the
Alvarez hypothesis even though no asteroid itself has ever been recovered.
[156]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
An asteroid of this size would be expected to leave an immense crater, even if the
asteroid itself was disintegrated by the impact. The intenseheat of the impact would
produce heat-shocked quartz in many types of rock. Also, large blocks thrown
aside by the impact would form secondary craters surrounding the main crater. To
date, several such secondary craters have been found along Mexico’s Yucatan
Peninsula, and heat-shocked quartz has been found both in Mexico and in Haiti. A
location called Chicxulub, along the Yucatan coast, has been suggested as the
primary impact site.
[157]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Glacier Formation
Glaciers are slowly moving masses of ice that have accumulated on land in areas
where more snowfalls during a year than melts. Snow falls as hexagonal crystals,
but once on the ground, snow is soon transformed into a compacted mass of
smaller, rounded grains. As the air space around them is lessened by compaction
and melting, the grains become denser. With further melting, refreezing, and
increased weight from newer snowfall above, the snow reaches a granular
recrystallized stage intermediate between flakes and ice known as firn. With
additional time, pressure, and refrozen meltwater from above, the small firn
granules become larger, interlocked crystals of blue glacial ice. When the ice is
thick enough, usually over 30 meters, the weight of the snow and firn will cause
the ice crystals toward the bottom to become plastic and to flow outward or
downward from the area of snow accumulation.
Glaciers are open systems, with snow as the system’s input and meltwater as the
system's main output. The glacial system is governed by two basic climatic
variables: precipitation and temperature. For a glacier to grow or maintain its mass,
there must be sufficient snowfall to match or exceed the annual loss through
melting, evaporation, and calving, which occurs when the glacier loses solid
chunks as icebergs to the sea or to large lakes. If summer temperatures are high for
too long, then all the snowfall from the previous winter will melt. Surplus snowfall
is essential for a glacier to develop. A surplus allows snow to accumulate and for
the pressure of snow accumulated over the years to transform buried snow into
glacial ice with a depth great enough for the ice to flow. Glaciers are sometimes
classified by temperature as faster-flowing temperate glaciers or as slower-flowing
polar glaciers.
[158]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Glaciers are part of Earth’s hydrologic cycle and are second only to the oceans in
the total amount of water contained. About 2 percent of Earth’s water is currently
frozen as ice. Two percent may be a deceiving figure, however, since over 80
percent of the world’s freshwater is locked up as ice in glaciers, with the majority
of it in Antarctica. The total amount of ice is even more awesome if we estimate
the water released upon the hypothetical melting of the world’s glaciers. Sea level
would rise about 60 meters. This would change the geography of the planet
considerably. In contrast, should another ice age occur, sea level would drop
drastically. During the last ice age, sea level dropped about 120 meters.
When snowfalls on high mountains or in polar regions, it may become part of the
glacial system. Unlike rain, which returns rapidly to the sea or atmosphere, the
snow that becomes part of a glacier is involved in a much more slowly cycling
system. Here water may be stored in ice form for hundreds or even hundreds of
thousands of years before being released again into the liquid water system as
meltwater. In the meantime, however, this ice is not static. Glaciers move slowly
across the land with tremendous energy, carving into even the hardest rock
formations and thereby reshaping the landscape as they engulf, push, drag, and
finally deposit rock debris in places far from its original location. As a result,
glaciers create a great variety of landforms that remain long after the surface is
released from its icy covering.
Throughout most of Earth’s history, glaciers did not exist, but at the present time
about 10 percent of Earth’s land surface is covered by glaciers. Present-day
glaciers are found in Antarctica, in Greenland, and at high elevations on all the
continents except Australia. In the recent past, from about 2.4 million to about
10,000 years ago, nearly a third of Earth’s land area was periodically covered by
[159]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
ice thousands of meters thick. In the much more distant past, other ice ages have
occurred.
[160]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 16
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[161]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Trade and the Ancient Middle East
Trade was the mainstay of the urban economy in the Middle East, as caravans
negotiated the surrounding desert, restricted only by access to water and by
mountain ranges. This has been so since ancient times, partly due to the geology of
the area, which is mostly limestone and sandstone, with few deposits of metallic
ore and other useful materials. Ancient demands for obsidian (a black volcanic
rock useful for making mirrors and tools) led to trade with Armenia to the north,
while jade for cutting tools was brought from Turkistan, and the precious stone
lapis lazuli was imported from Afghanistan. One can trace such expeditions back
to ancient Sumeria, the earliest known Middle Eastern civilization. Records show
merchant caravans and trading posts set up by the Sumerians in the surrounding
mountains and deserts of Persia and Arabia, where they traded grain for raw
materials, such as timber and stones, as well as for metals and gems.
Reliance on trade had several important consequences. Production was generally in
the hands of skilled individual artisans doing piecework under the tutelage of a
master who was also the shop owner.In these shops differences of rank were
blurred as artisans and masters labored side by side in the same modest
establishment, were usually members of the same guild and religious sect, lived in
the same neighborhoods, and often had assumed (or real) kinship
relationships. The worker was bound to the master by a mutual contract that either
one could repudiate, and the relationship was conceptualized as one of partnership.
This mode of craft production favored the growth of self-governing and
ideologically egalitarian craft guilds everywhere in the Middle Eastern city. These
were essentially professional associations that provided for the mutual aid and
protection of their members, and allowed for the maintenance of professional
[162]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
standards. The growth of independent guilds was furthered by the fact that surplus
was not a result of domestic craft production but resulted primarily from
international trading; the government left working people to govern themselves,
much as shepherds of tribal confederacies were left alone by their leaders. In the
multiplicity of small-scale local egalitarian or quasi-egalitarian organizations for
fellowship, worship, and production that flourished in this laissez-faire
environment, individuals could interact with one another within a community of
harmony and ideological equality, following their own popularly elected leaders
and governing themselves by shared consensus while minimizing distinctions of
wealth and power.
The mercantile economy was also characterized by a peculiar moral stance that is
typical of people who live by trade—an attitude that is individualistic, calculating,
risk taking, and adaptive to circumstances. As among tribes people, personal
relationships and a careful weighing of character have always been crucial in a
mercantile economy with little regulation, where one's word is one's bond and
where informal ties of trust cement together an international trade network. Nor
have merchants and artisans ever had much tolerance for aristocratic professions of
moral superiority, favoring instead an egalitarian ethic of the open market, where
steady hard work, the loyalty of one's fellows, and entrepreneurial skill make all
the difference. And, like the pastoralists, Middle Eastern merchants and artisans
unhappy with their environment could simply pack up and leave for greener
pastures—an act of self-assertion wholly impossible in most other civilizations
throughout history.
Dependence on long-distance trade also meant that the great empires of the Middle
East were built both literally and figuratively on shifting sand. The central state,
though often very rich and very populous, was intrinsically fragile, since the
[163]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
development of new international trade routes could undermine the monetary base
and erode state power, as occurred when European seafarers circumvented Middle
Eastern merchants after Vasco da Gama's voyage around Africa in the late fifteenth
century opened up a southern route. The ecology of the region also permitted
armed predators to prowl the surrounding barrens, which were almost impossible
for a state to control. Peripheral peoples therefore had a great advantage in their
dealings with the center, making government authority insecure and anxious.
www.ZabanExam.com
[164]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Development of the Periodic Table
The periodic table is a chart that reflects the periodic recurrence of chemical and
physical properties of the elements when the elements are arranged in order of
increasing atomic number (the number of protons in the nucleus). It is a
monumental scientific achievement, and its development illustrates the
essential interplay between observation, prediction, and testing required for
scientific progress. In the 1800's scientists were searching for new elements. By the
late 1860's more than 60 chemical elements had been identified, and much was
known about their descriptive chemistry. Various proposals were put forth to
arrange the elements into groups based on similarities in chemical and physical
properties. The next step was to recognize a connection between group properties
(physical or chemical similarities) and atomic mass (the measured mass of an
individual atom of an element). When the elements known at the time were
ordered by increasing atomic mass, it was found that successive elements belonged
to different chemical groups and that the order of the groups in this sequence was
fixed and repeated itself at regular intervals. Thus when the series of elements was
written so as to begin a new horizontal row with each alkali metal, elements of the
same groups were automatically assembled in vertical columns in a periodic table
of the elements. This table was the forerunner of the modern table.
When the German chemist Lothar Meyer and (independently) the Russian Dmitry
Mendeleyev first introduced the periodic table in 1869-70, one-third of the
naturally occurring chemical elements had not yet been discovered. Yet both
chemists were sufficiently farsighted to leave gaps where their analyses of periodic
physical and chemical properties indicated that new elements should be
located. Mendeleyev was bolder than Meyer and even assumed that if a measured
[165]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
atomic mass put an element in the wrong place in the table, the atomic mass was
wrong. In some cases this was true. Indium, for example, had previously been
assigned an atomic mass between those of arsenic and selenium. Because there is
no space in the periodic table between these two elements, Mendeleyev suggested
that the atomic mass of indium be changed to a completely different value, where it
would fill an empty space between cadmium and tin. In fact, subsequent work has
shown that in a periodic table, elements should not be ordered strictly by atomic
mass. For example, tellurium comes before iodine in the periodic table, even
though its atomic mass is slightly greater. Such anomalies are due to the
relative abundance of the "isotopes" or varieties of each element. All the isotopes
of a given element have the same number of protons, but differ in their number of
neutrons, and hence in their atomic mass. The isotopes of a given element have the
same chemical properties but slightly different physical properties. We now know
that atomic number (the number of protons in the nucleus), not atomic mass
number (the number of protons and neutrons), determines chemical behavior.
Mendeleyev went further than Meyer in another respect: he predicted the
properties of six elements yet to be discovered. For example, a gap just below
aluminum suggested a new element would be found with properties analogous
to those of aluminum. Mendeleyev designated this element "eka-aluminum" (eka is
the Sanskrit word for "next") and predicted its properties. Just five years later an
element with the proper atomic mass was isolated and named gallium by its
discoverer. The close correspondence between the observed properties of gallium
and Mendeleyev's predictions for eka-aluminum lent strong support to the periodic
law. Additional support came in 1885 when eka-silicon, which had also been
described in advance by Mendeleyev, was discovered and named germanium.
[166]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The structure of the periodic table appeared to limit the number of possible
elements. It was therefore quite surprising when John William Strut( Lord
Rayleigh, discovered a gaseous element in 1894 that did not fit into the previous
classification scheme. A century earlier, Henry Cavendish had noted the existence
of a residual gas when oxygen and nitrogen are removed from air, but its
importance had not been realized. Together with William Ramsay, Rayleigh
isolated the gas (separating it from other substances into its pure state) and named
it argon. Ramsay then studied a gas that was present in natural gas deposits and
discovered that it was helium, an element whose presence in the Sun had been
noted earlier in the spectrum of sunlight but that had not previously been known on
Earth. Rayleigh and Ramsay postulated the existence of a new group of elements,
and in 1898 other members of the series (neon, krypton, and xenon) were isolated.
[167]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Planets in Our Solar System
The Sun is the hub of a huge rotating system consisting of nine planets, their
satellites, and numerous small bodies, including asteroids, comets, and meteoroids.
An estimated 99.85 percent of the mass of our solar system is contained within the
Sun, while the planets collectively make up most of the remaining 0.15 percent.
The planets, in order of their distance from the Sun, are Mercury, Venus, Earth,
Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto. Under the control of the Sun's
gravitational force, each planet maintains an elliptical orbit and all of them travel
in the same direction.
The planets in our solar system fall into two groups: the terrestrial (Earth-like)
planets (Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars) and the Jovian (Jupiter-like) planets
(Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune). Pluto is not included in either category,
because its great distance from Earth and its small size make this planet's true
nature a mystery. The most obvious difference between the terrestrial and the
Jovian planets is their size. The largest terrestrial planet, Earth has a diameter only
one quarter as great as the diameter of the smallest Jovian planet, Neptune, and its
mass is only one seventeenth as great. Hence, the Jovian planets are often called
giants. Also, because of their relative locations, the four Jovian planets are known
as the outer planets, while the terrestrial planets are known as the inner planets.
There appears to be a correlation between the positions of these planets and their
sizes.
Other dimensions along which the two groups differ markedly are density and
composition. The densities of the terrestrial planets average about 5 times the
density of water, whereas the Jovian planets have densities that average only 1.5
times the density of water. One of the outer planets, Saturn, has a density of only
[168]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
0.7 that of water, which means that Saturn would float in water. Variations in the
composition of the planets are largely responsible for the density differences. The
substances that make up both groups of planets are divided into three groups—
gases, rocks, and ices—based on their melting points. The terrestrial planets are
mostly rocks: dense rocky and metallic material, with minor amounts of gases. The
Jovian planets, on the other hand, contain a large percentage of the gases hydrogen
and helium, with varying amounts of ices: mostly water, ammonia, and methane
ices.
The Jovian planets have very thick atmospheres consisting of varying amounts of
hydrogen, helium, methane, and ammonia. By comparison, the terrestrial planets
have meager atmospheres at best. A planet's ability to retain an atmosphere
depends on its temperature and mass. Simply stated, a gas molecule can
"evaporate" from a planet if it reaches a speed known as the escape velocity. For
Earth, this velocity is 11 kilometers per second. Any material, including a rocket,
must reach this speed before it can leave Earth and go into space. The Jovian
planets, because of their greater masses and thus higher surface gravities, have
higher escape velocities (21-60 kilometers per second) than the terrestrial planets.
Consequently, it is more difficult for gases to "evaporate" from them. Also,
because the molecular motion of a gas depends on temperature, at the low
temperatures of the Jovian planets even the lightest gases are unlikely to acquire
the speed needed to escape. On the other hand, a comparatively warm body with a
small surface gravity, like Earth's moon, is unable to hold even the heaviest gas
and thus lacks an atmosphere. The slightly larger terrestrial planets Earth, Venus,
and Mars retain some heavy gases like carbon dioxide, but even their atmospheres
make up only an infinitesimally small portion of their total mass.
[169]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The orderly nature of our solar system leads most astronomers to conclude that the
planets formed at essentially the same time and from the same material as the Sun.
It is hypothesized that the primordialcloud of dust and gas from which all the
planets are thought to have condensed had a composition somewhat similar to that
of Jupiter. However, unlike Jupiter, the terrestrial planets today are nearly void of
light gases and ices. The explanation may be that the terrestrial planets were once
much larger and richer in these materials but eventually lost them because of these
bodies' relative closeness to the Sun, which meant that their temperatures were
relatively high.
[170]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 17
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[171]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Europe's Early Sea Trade with Asia
In the fourteenth century, a number of political developments cut Europe's
overland trade routes to southern and eastern Asia, with which Europe had had
important and highly profitable commercial ties since the twelfth century. This
development, coming as it did when the bottom had fallen out of the European
economy, provided an impetus to a long-held desire to secure direct relations with
the East by establishing a sea trade. Widely reported, if somewhat distrusted,
accounts by figures like the famous traveler from Venice, Marco Polo, of the
willingness of people in China to trade with Europeans and of the immensity of the
wealth to be gained by such contact made the idea irresistible. Possibilities for
trade seemed promising, but no hope existed for maintaining the traditional routes
over land. A new way had to be found.
The chief problem was technological: How were the Europeans to reach the East?
Europe's maritime tradition had developed in the context of easily navigable seas—
the Mediterranean, the Baltic, and, to a lesser extent, the North Sea between
England and the Continent—not of vast oceans. New types of ships were needed,
new methods of finding one's way, new techniques for financing so vast a
scheme. The sheer scale of the investment it took to begin commercial expansion
at sea reflects the immensity of the profits that such East-West trade could
create. Spices were the most sought-after commodities. Spices not
only dramaticallyimproved the taste of the European diet but also were used to
manufacture perfumes and certain medicines. But even high-priced commodities
like spices had to be transported in large bulk in order to justify the expense and
trouble of sailing around the African continent all the way to India and China.
[172]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The principal seagoing ship used throughout the Middle Ages was the galley, a
long, low ship fitted with sails but driven primarily by oars. The largest galleys had
as many as 50 oarsmen. Since they had relatively shallow hulls, they were unstable
when driven by sail or when on rough water: hence they were unsuitable for the
voyage to the East. Even if they hugged the African coastline, they had little
chance of surviving a crossing of the Indian Ocean. Shortly after 1400,
shipbuilders began developing a new type of vessel properly designed to operate in
rough, open water: the caravel. It had a wider and deeper hull than the galley and
hence could carry more cargo: increased stability made it possible to add multiple
masts and sails. In the largest caravels, two main masts held large square sails that
provided the bulk of the thrust driving the ship forward, while a smaller forward
mast held a triangular-shaped sail, called a lateen sail, which could be moved into a
variety of positions to maneuver the ship.
The astrolabe had long been the primary instrument for navigation, having been
introduced in the eleventh century. It operated by measuring the height of the Sun
and the fixed stars: by calculating the angles created by these points, it determined
the degree of latitude at which one stood (The problem of determining longitude,
though, was not solved until the eighteenth century.) By the early thirteenth
century,Western Europeans had also developed and put into use the magnetic
compass, which helped when clouds obliterated both the Sun and the stars. Also
beginning in the thirteenth century, there were new maps refined by precise
calculations and the reports of sailors that made it possible to trace one's path with
reasonable accuracy. Certain institutional and practical norms had become
established as well. A maritime code known as the Consulate of the Sea, which
originated in the western Mediterranean region in the fourteenth century, won
acceptance by a majority of sea goers as the normative code for maritime conduct;
[173]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
it defined such matters as the authority of a ship's officers, protocols of command,
pay structures, the rights of sailors, and the rules of engagement when ships met
one another on the sea-lanes. Thus by about 1400 the key elements were in place to
enable Europe to begin its seaward adventure.
www.ZabanExam.com
[174]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Animal Signals in the Rain Forest
The daytime quality of light in forests varies with the density of the vegetation, the
angle of the Sun, and the amount of cloud in the sky. Both animals and plants have
different appearances in these various lighting conditions. A color or pattern that is
relatively indistinct in one kind of light may be quite conspicuous in another.
In the varied and constantly changing light environment of the forest, an animal
must be able to send visual signals to members of its own species and at the same
time avoid being detected by predators. An animal can hide from predators by
choosing the light environment in which its pattern is least visible. This may
require moving to different parts of the forest at different times of the day or under
different weather conditions, or it may be achieved by changing color according to
the changing light conditions. Many species of amphibians (frogs and toads) and
reptiles (lizards and snakes) are able to change their color patterns to camouflage
themselves. Some also signal by changing color. The chameleon lizard has the
most striking ability to do this. Some chameleon species can change from a rather
dull appearance to a full riot of carnival colors in seconds. By this means,
they signal their level of aggression or readiness to mate.
Other species take into account the changing conditions of light by performing
their visual displays only when the light is favorable. A male bird of paradise may
put himself in the limelight by displaying his spectacular plumage in the best stage
setting to attract a female. Certain butterflies move into spots of sunlight that have
penetrated to the forest floor and display by opening and closing their beautifully
patterned wings in the bright spotlights They also compete with each other for the
best spot of sunlight.
[175]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Very little light filters through the canopy of leaves and branches in a rain forest to
reach ground level—or close to the ground—and at those levels the yellow-to-
green wavelengths predominate. A signal might be most easily seen if it is
maximally bright. In the green-to yellow lighting conditions of the lowest levels of
the forest, yellow and green would be the brightest colors, but when an animal is
signaling, these colors would not be very visible if the animal was sitting in an area
with a yellowish or greenish background. The best signal depends not only on its
brightness but also on how well it contrasts with the background against which it
must be seen. In this part of the rain forest, therefore, red and orange are the best
colors for signaling, and they are the colors used in signals by the ground-walking
Australian brush turkey. This species, which lives in the rain forests and scrublands
of the east coast of Australia, has a brown to-black plumage with bare, bright-red
skin on the head and neck and a neck collar of orange-yellow loosely hanging skin.
During courtship and aggressive displays, the turkey enlarges its colored neck
collar by inflating sacs in the neck region and then flings about a pendulous part of
the colored signaling apparatus as it utters calls designed to attract or repel. This
impressive display is clearly visible in the light spectrum illuminating the forest
floor.
Less colorful birds and animals that inhabit the rain forest tend to rely on forms of
signaling other than the visual, particularly over long distances.The piercing cries
of the rhinoceros hornbill characterize the Southeast Asian rain forest, as do the
unmistakable calls of the gibbons. In densely wooded environments,sound is the
best means of communication over distance because in comparison with light, it
travels with little impediment from trees and other vegetation. In forests, visual
signals can be seen only at short distances, where they are not obstructed by
trees. The male riflebird exploits both of these modes of signaling simultaneously
[176]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
in his courtship display. The sounds made as each wing is opened carry extremely
well over distance and advertise his presence widely. The ritualized visual display
communicates in close quarters when a female has approached.
[177]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Symbiotic Relationships
A symbiotic relationship is an interaction between two or more species in which
one species lives in or on another species. There are three main types of symbiotic
relationships: parasitism, commensalism, and mutualism. The first and the third
can be key factors in the structure of a biological community; that is, all the
populations of organisms living together and potentially interacting in a particular
area.
Parasitism is a kind of predator-prey relationship in which one organism, the
parasite, derives its food at the expense of its symbiotic associate, the host.
Parasites are usually smaller than their hosts. An example of a parasite is a
tapeworm that lives inside the intestines of a larger animal and absorbs nutrients
from its host. Natural selection favors the parasites that are best able to find and
feed on hosts. At the same time, defensive abilities of hosts are also selected for.
As an example, plants make chemicals toxic to fungal and bacterial parasites,
along with ones toxic to predatory animals (sometimes they are the same
chemicals). In vertebrates, the immune system provides a multiple defense against
internal parasites.
At times, it is actually possible to watch the effects of natural selection in host-
parasite relationships. For example, Australia during the 1940 s was overrun by
hundreds of millions of European rabbits. The rabbits destroyed huge expanses of
Australia and threatened the sheep and cattle industries. In 1950, myxoma virus, a
parasite that affects rabbits, was deliberately introduced into Australia to control
the rabbit population. Spread rapidly by mosquitoes, the virus devastated the rabbit
population. The virus was less deadly to the offspring of surviving rabbits,
however, and it caused less and less harm over the years. Apparently, genotypes
[178]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
(the genetic make-up of an organism) in the rabbit population were selected that
were better able to resist the parasite. Meanwhile, the deadliest strains of the virus
perished with their hosts as natural selection favored strains that could infect hosts
but not kill them. Thus, natural selection stabilized this host-parasite relationship.
In contrast to parasitism, in commensalism, one partner benefits without
significantly affecting the other. Few cases of absolute commensalism probably
exist, because it is unlikely that one of the partners will be completely unaffected.
Commensal associations sometimes involve one species' obtaining food that
is inadvertently exposed by another. For instance, several kinds of birds feed on
insects flushed out of the grass by grazing cattle. It is difficult to imagine how this
could affect the cattle, but the relationship may help or hinder them in some way
not yet recognized.
The third type of symbiosis, mutualism, benefits both partners in the relationship
Legume plants and their nitrogen-fixing bacteria, and the interactions between
flowering plants and their pollinators, are examples of mutualistic association. In
the first case, the plants provide the bacteria with carbohydrates and other organic
compounds, and the bacteria have enzymes that act as catalysts that eventually add
nitrogen to the soil, enriching it. In the second case, pollinators (insects, birds)
obtain food from the flowering plant, and the plant has its pollen distributed and
seeds dispersed much more efficiently than they would be if they were carried by
the wind only. Another example of mutualism would be the bull's horn acacia tree,
which grows in Central and South America. The tree provides a place to live for
ants of the genus Pseudomyrmex. The ants live in large, hollow thorns and eat
sugar secreted by the tree. The ants also eat yellow structures at the tip of leaflets:
these are protein rich and seem to have no function for the tree except to attract
ants. The ants benefit the host tree by attacking virtually anything that touches it.
[179]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
They sting other insects and large herbivores (animals that eat only plants) and
even clip surrounding vegetation that grows near the tree. When the ants are
removed, the trees usually die, probably because herbivores damage them so much
that they are unable to compete with surrounding vegetation for light and growing
space.
The complex interplay of species in symbiotic relationships highlights an
important point about communities: Their structure depends on a web of diverse
connections among organisms.
[180]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 18
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[181]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Industrialization in the Netherlands and
Scandinavia
While some European countries, such as England and Germany, began to
industrialize in the eighteenth century, the Netherlands and the Scandinavian
countries of Denmark, Norway, and Sweden developed later. All four of these
countries lagged considerably behind in the early nineteenth century. However,
they industrialized rapidly in the second half of the century, especially in the last
two or three decades. In view of their later start and their lack of coal—
undoubtedly the main reason they were not among the early industrializers—it is
important to understand the sources of their success.
All had small populations. At the beginning of the nineteenth century, Denmark
and Norway had fewer than 1 million people, while Sweden and the Netherlands
had fewer than 2.5 million inhabitants. All exhibited moderate growth rates in the
course of the century (Denmark the highest and Sweden the lowest), but all more
than doubled in population by 1900. Density varied greatly. The Netherlands had
one of the highest population densities in Europe, whereas Norway and Sweden
had the lowest Denmark was in between but closer to the Netherlands.
Considering human capital as a characteristic of the population, however, all four
countries were advantaged by the large percentages of their populations who could
read and write. In both 1850 and 1914, the Scandinavian countries had the highest
literacy rates in Europe, or in the world, and the Netherlands was well above the
European average. This fact was of enormous value in helping the national
economies find their niches in the evolving currents of the international economy.
[182]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Location was an important factor for all four countries. All had immediate access
to the sea, and this had important implications for a significant international
resource, fish, as well as for cheap transport, merchant marines, and the
shipbuilding industry. Each took advantage of these opportunities in its own way.
The people of the Netherlands, with a long tradition of fisheries and mercantile
shipping, had difficulty in developing good harbors suitable for steamships:
eventually they did so at Rotterdam and Amsterdam, with exceptional results for
transit trade with Germany and central Europe and for the processing of overseas
foodstuffs and raw materials (sugar, tobacco, chocolate, grain, and eventually oil).
Denmark also had an admirable commercial history, particularly with respect to
traffic through the Sound (the strait separating Denmark and Sweden). In 1857, in
return for a payment of 63 million kronor from other commercial nations,
Denmark abolished the Sound toll dues the fees it had collected since 1497 for the
use of the Sound. This, along with other policy shifts toward free trade, resulted in
a significant increase in traffic through the Sound and in the port of Copenhagen.
The political institutions of the four countries posed no significant barriers to
industrialization or economic growth. The nineteenth century passed relatively
peacefully for these countries, with progressivedemocratization taking place in all
of them. They were reasonably well governed, without notable corruption or
grandiose state projects, although in all of them the government gave some aid to
railways, and in Sweden the state built the main lines. As small countries
dependent on foreign markets, they followed a liberal trade policy in the main,
though a protectionist movement developed in Sweden. In Denmark and Sweden
agricultural reforms took place gradually from the late eighteenth century through
the first half of the nineteenth, resulting in a new class of peasant landowners with
a definite market orientation.
[183]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The key factor in the success of these countries (along with high literacy, which
contributed to it) was their ability to adapt to the international division of labor
determined by the early industrializers and to stake out areas of specialization in
international markets for which they were especially well suited. This meant a
great dependence on international commerce, which had notorious fluctuations; but
it also meant high returns to those factors of production that were fortunate enough
to be well placed in times of prosperity. In Sweden exports accounted for 18
percent of the national income in 1870, and in 1913, 22 percent of a much larger
national income. In the early twentieth century, Denmark exported 63 percent of its
agricultural production: butter, pork products, and eggs. It exported 80 percent of
its butter, almost all to Great Britain, where it accounted for 40 percent of British
butter imports.
www.ZabanExam.com
[184]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The Mystery of Yawning
According to conventional theory, yawning takes place when people are bored or
sleepy and serves the function of increasing alertness by reversing, through deeper
breathing, the drop in blood oxygen levels that are caused by the shallow breathing
that accompanies lack of sleep or boredom. Unfortunately, the few scientific
investigations of yawning have failed to find any connection between how often
someone yawns and how much sleep they have had or how tired they are. About
the closest any research has come to supporting the tiredness theory is to confirm
that adults yawn more often on weekdays than at weekends, and that school
children yawn more frequently in their first year at primary school than they do in
kindergarten.
Another flaw of the tiredness theory is that yawning does not raise alertness or
physiological activity, as the theory would predict. When researchers measured the
heart rate, muscle tension and skin conductance of people before, during and after
yawning, they did detect some changes in skin conductance following yawning,
indicating a slight increase in physiological activity. However, similar changes
occurred when the subjects were asked simply to open their mouths or to breathe
deeply. Yawning did nothing special to their state of physiological activity.
Experiments have also cast serious doubt on the belief that yawning is triggered by
a drop in blood oxygen or a rise in blood carbon dioxide. Volunteers were told to
think about yawning while they breathed either normal air, pure oxygen, or an air
mixture with an above-normal level of carbon dioxide. If the theory was correct,
breathing air with extra carbon dioxide should have triggered yawning, while
breathing pure oxygen should have suppressed yawning. In fact, neither condition
made any difference to the frequency of yawning, which remained constant at
[185]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
about 24 yawns per hour. Another experiment demonstrated that physical exercise,
which was sufficiently vigorous to double the rate of breathing, had no effect on
the frequency of yawning. Again the implication is that yawning has little or
nothing to do with oxygen.
A completely different theory holds that yawning assists in the physical
development of the lungs early in life, but has no remaining biological function in
adults. It has been suggested that yawning and hiccupping might serve to clear out
the fetuses airways. The lungs of a fetus secrete a liquid that mixes with its
mother's amniotic fluid. Babies with congenital blockages that prevent this fluid
from escaping from their lungs are sometimes born with deformed lungs. It might
be that yawning helps to clear out the lungs by periodically lowering the pressure
in them. According to this theory, yawning in adults is just a developmental fossil
with no biological function. But, while accepting that not everything in life can be
explained by Darwinian evolution, there are sound reasons for being skeptical of
theories like this one, which avoid the issue of what yawning does for adults.
Yawning is distracting, consumes energy and takes time. It is almost certainly
doing something significant in adults as well as in fetuses. What could it be?
The empirical evidence, such as it is, suggests an altogether different function for
yawning—namely, that yawning prepares us for a change in activity level. Support
for this theory came from a study of yawning behavior in everyday life. Volunteers
wore wrist-mounted devices that automatically recorded their physical activity for
up to two weeks: the volunteers also recorded their yawns by pressing a button on
the device each time they yawned. The data showed that yawning tended to occur
about 15 minutes before a period of increased behavioral activity. Yawning bore
no relationship to sleep patterns, however. This accords with anecdotal evidence
that people often yawn in situations where they are neither tired nor bored, but are
[186]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
preparing for impending mental and physical activity. Such yawning is often
referred to as "incongruous" because it seems out of place, at least on the tiredness
view: soldiers yawning before combat, musicians yawning before performing, and
athletes yawning before competing. Their yawning seems to have nothing to do
with sleepiness or boredom—quite the reverse—but it does precede a change in
activity level.
[187]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Lightning
Lightning is a brilliant flash of light produced by an electrical discharge from a
storm cloud. The electrical discharge takes place when the attractive tension
between a region of negatively charged particles and a region of positively charged
particles becomes so great that the charged particles suddenly rush together. The
coming together of the oppositely charged particles neutralizes the electrical
tension and releases a tremendous amount of energy, which we see as lightning.
The separation of positively and negatively charged particles takes place during the
development of the storm cloud.
The separation of charged particles that forms in a storm cloud has a sandwich-like
structure. Concentrations of positively charged particles develop at the top and
bottom of the cloud, but the middle region becomes negatively charged. Recent
measurements made in the field together with laboratory simulations offer a
promising explanation of how this structure of charged particles forms. What
happens is that small (millimeter-to centimeter-size) pellets of ice form in the cold
upper regions of the cloud. When these ice pellets fall, some of them strike much
smaller ice crystals in the center of the cloud. The temperature at the center of the
cloud is about -15℃ or lower. At such temperatures, the collision between the ice
pellets and the ice crystals causes electrical charges to shift so that the ice
pellets acquire a negative charge and the ice crystals become positively charged.
Then updraft wind currents carry the light, positively charged ice crystals up to the
top of the cloud. The heavier negatively charged ice pellets are left to concentrate
in the center. This process explains why the top of the cloud becomes positively
charged, while the center becomes negatively charged. The negatively charged
region is large: several hundred meters thick and several kilometers in diameter.
[188]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Below this large, cold, negatively charged region, the cloud is warmer than -15℃,
and at these temperatures, collisions between ice crystals and falling ice pellets
produce positively charged ice pellets that then populate a small region at the base
of the cloud.
Most lightning takes place within a cloud when the charge separation within the
cloud collapses. However, as the storm cloud develops, the ground beneath the
cloud becomes positively charged and lightning can take place in the form of an
electrical discharge between the negative charge of the cloud and the positively
charged ground. Lightning that strikes the ground is the most likely to be
destructive, so even though it represents only 20 percent of all lightning, it has
received a lot of scientific attention.
Using high-speed photography, scientists have determined that there are two steps
to the occurrence of lightning from a cloud to the ground. First, a channel, or path,
is formed that connects the cloud and the ground. Then a strong current of
electrons follows that path from the cloud to the ground, and it is that current
that illuminates the channel as the lightning we see.
The formation of the channel is initiated when electrons surge from the cloud base
toward the ground. When a stream of these negatively charged electrons comes
within 100 meters of the ground it is met by a stream of positively charged
particles that comes up from the ground. When the negatively and positively
charged streams meet, a complete channel connecting the cloud and the ground is
formed. The channel is only a few centimeters in diameter, but that is wide enough
for electrons to follow the channel to the ground in the visible form of a flash of
lightning. The stream of positive particles that meets the surge of electrons from
the cloud often arises from a tall pointed structure such as a metal flagpole or a
[189]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
tower. That is why the subsequent lightning that follows the completed channel
often strikes a tall structure.
Once a channel has been formed, it is usually used by several lightning discharges,
each of them consisting of a stream of electrons from the cloud meeting a stream of
positive particles along the established path. Sometimes, however, a stream of
electrons following an established channel is met by a positive stream making a
new path up from the ground. The result is a forked lightning that strikes the
ground in two places.
[190]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 19
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[191]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The Roman Army's Impact on Britain
In the wake of the Roman Empire's conquest of Britain in the first century A.D., a
large number of troops stayed in the new province, and these troops had a
considerable impact on Britain with their camps, fortifications, and participation in
the local economy. Assessing the impact of the army on the civilian population
starts from the realization that the soldiers were always unevenly distributed across
the country. Areas rapidly incorporated into the empire were not long affected by
the military. Where the army remained stationed, its presence was much more
influential. The imposition of a military base involved the requisition of native
lands for both the fort and the territory needed to feed and exercise the soldiers'
animals. The imposition of military rule also robbed local leaders of opportunities
to participate in local government, so social development was stunted and the seeds
of disaffection sown. This then meant that the military had to remain
to suppress rebellion and organize government.
Economic exchange was clearly very important as the Roman army brought with it
very substantial spending power. Locally a fort had two kinds of impact. Its large
population needed food and other supplies.Some of these were certainly brought
from long distances, but demands were inevitably placed on the local
area. Although goods could be requisitioned, they were usually paid for, and this
probably stimulated changes in the local economy. When not campaigning,
soldiers needed to be occupied; otherwise they represented a potentially dangerous
source of friction and disloyalty. Hence a writing tablet dated 25 April tells of 343
men at one fort engaged on tasks like shoemaking, building a bathhouse, operating
kilns, digging clay, and working lead. Such activities had a major effect on the
[192]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
local area, in particular with the construction of infrastructure such as roads, which
improved access to remote areas.
Each soldier received his pay, but in regions without a developed economy there
was initially little on which it could be spent. The pool of excess cash rapidly
stimulated a thriving economy outside fort gates. Some of the demand for the
services and goods was no doubt fulfilled by people drawn from far afield, but
some local people certainly became entwined in this new economy. There was
informal marriage with soldiers, who until AD 197 were not legally entitled
to wed, and whole new communities grew up near the forts. These settlements
acted like small towns, becoming centers for the artisan and trading populations.
The army also provided a means of personal advancement for auxiliary soldiers
recruited from the native peoples, as a man obtained hereditary Roman citizenship
on retirement after service in an auxiliary regiment. Such units recruited on an ad
hoc (as needed) basis from the area in which they were stationed, and there was
evidently large-scale recruitment within Britain. The total numbers were at least
12,500 men up to the reign of the emperor Hadrian (A.D. 117-138), with a peak
around A.D. 80. Although a small proportion of the total population, this perhaps
had a massive local impact when a large proportion of the young men were
removed from an area. Newly raised regiments were normally transferred to
another province from whence it was unlikely that individual recruits would ever
return. Most units raised in Britain went elsewhere on the European continent,
although one is recorded in Morocco. The reverse process brought young men to
Britain, where many continued to live after their 20 to 25 years of service, and this
added to the cosmopolitan Roman character of the frontier population. By the later
Roman period, frontier garrisons (groups of soldiers) were only rarely transferred,
[193]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
service in units became effectively hereditary, and forts were no longer populated
or maintained at full strength.
This process of settling in as a community over several generations, combined with
local recruitment, presumably accounts for the apparent stability of the British
northern frontier in the later Roman period. It also explains why some of the forts
continued in occupation long after Rome ceased to have any formal authority in
Britain, at the beginning of the fifth century A.D. The circumstances that had
allowed natives to become Romanized also led the self-sustaining military
community of the frontier area to become effectively British.
www.ZabanExam.com
[194]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Succession, Climax, and Ecosystems
In the late nineteenth century, ecology began to grow into an independent science
from its roots in natural history and plant geography. The emphasis of this new
"community ecology" was on the composition and structure of communities
consisting of different species. In the early twentieth century, the American
ecologist Frederic Clements pointed out that a succession of plant communities
would develop after a disturbance such as a volcanic eruption, heavy flood, or
forest fire. An abandoned field, for instance, will be invaded successively by
herbaceous plants (plants with little or no woody tissue), shrubs, and trees,
eventually becoming a forest. Light-loving species are always among the first
invaders, while shade-tolerant species appear later in the succession.
Clements and other early ecologists saw almost lawlike regularity in the order of
succession, but that has not been substantiated. A general trend can be recognized,
but the details are usually unpredictable. Succession is influenced by many factors:
the nature of the soil, exposure to sun and wind, regularity of precipitation, chance
colonizations, and many other random processes.
The final stage of a succession, called the climax by Clements and early ecologists,
is likewise not predictable or of uniform composition. There is usually a good deal
of turnover in species composition, even in a mature community. The nature of the
climax is influenced by the same factors that influenced succession. Nevertheless,
mature natural environments are usually in equilibrium. They change relatively
little through time unless the environment itself changes.
For Clements, the climax was a "superorganism," an organic entity. Even some
authors who accepted the climax concept rejected Clements' characterization of it
as a superorganism, and it is indeed a misleading metaphor. An ant colony may
[195]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
be legitimately called a superorganism because its communication system is so
highly organized that the colony always works as a whole and appropriately
according to the circumstances. But there is no evidence for such an interacting
communicative network in a climax plant formation. Many authors prefer the term
"association" to the term "community" in order to stress the looseness of the
interaction.
Even less fortunate was the extension of this type of thinking to include animals as
well as plants. This resulted in the "biome," a combination of coexisting flora and
fauna. Though it is true that many animals are strictly associated with certain
plants, it is misleading to speak of a "spruce-moose biome," for example, because
there is no internal cohesion to their association as in an organism. The spruce
community is not substantially affected by either the presence or absence of
moose. Indeed, there are vast areas of spruce forest without moose. The opposition
to the Clementsian concept of plant ecology was initiated by Herbert Gleason, soon
joined by various other ecologists. Their major point was that the distribution of a
given species was controlled by the habitat requirements of that species and that
therefore the vegetation types were a simple consequence of the ecologies of
individual plant species.
With "climax," "biome," "superorganism," and various other technical terms for
the association of animals and plants at a given locality being criticized, the term
"ecosystem" was more and more widely adopted for the whole system of
associated organisms together with the physical factors of their environment.
Eventually, the energy-transforming role of such a system was emphasized.
Ecosystems thus involve the circulation, transformation, and accumulation of
energy and matter through the medium of living things and their activities. The
[196]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
ecologist is concerned primarily with the quantities of matter and energy that pass
through a given ecosystem, and with the rates at which they do so.
Although the ecosystem concept was very popular in the 1950s and 1960s, it is no
longer the dominant paradigm.Gleason's arguments against climax and biome are
largely valid against ecosystems as well.Furthermore, the number of interactions is
so great that they are difficult to analyze, even with the help of large computers.
Finally, younger ecologists have found ecological problems involving behavior
and life-history adaptations more attractive than measuring physical
constants. Nevertheless, one still speaks of the ecosystem when referring to a local
association of animals and plants, usually without paying much attention to the
energy aspects.
[197]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Discovering the Ice Ages
In the middle of the nineteenth century, Louis Agassiz, one of the first scientists to
study glaciers, immigrated to the United States from Switzerland and became a
professor at Harvard University, where he continued his studies in geology and
other sciences. For his research, Agassiz visited many places in the northern parts
of Europe and North America, from the mountains of Scandinavia and New
England to the rolling hills of the American Midwest. In all these diverse regions,
Agassiz saw signs of glacial erosion and sedimentation. In flat plains country, he
saw moraines (accumulations of earth and loose rock that form at the edges of
glaciers) that reminded him of the terminal moraines found at the end of valley
glaciers in the Alps. The heterogeneous material of the drift (sand, clay, and rocks
deposited there) convinced him of its glacial origin.
The areas covered by this material were so vast that the ice that deposited it must
have been a continental glacier larger than Greenland or Antarctica. Eventually,
Agassiz and others convinced geologists and the general public that a great
continental glaciation had extended the polar ice caps far into regions that
now enjoy temperate climates. For the first time, people began to talk about ice
ages. It was also apparent that the glaciation occurred in the relatively recent past
because the drift was soft, like freshly deposited sediment. We now know the age
of the glaciation accurately from radiometric dating of the carbon-14 in logs buried
in the drift. The drift of the last glaciation was deposited during one of the most
recent epochs of geologic time, the Pleistocene, which lasted from 1.8 million to
10,000 years ago. Along the east coast of the United States, the southernmost
advance of this ice is recorded by the enormous sand and drift deposits of the
terminal moraines that form Long Island and Cape Cod.
[198]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
It soon became clear that there were multiple glacial ages during the Pleistocene,
with warmer interglacial intervals between them. As geologists mapped glacial
deposits in the late nineteenth century, they became aware that there were several
layers of drift, the lower ones corresponding to earlier ice ages. Between the older
layers of glacial material were well-developed soils containing fossils of warm-
climate plants. These soils were evidence that the glaciers retreated as the climate
warmed. By the early part of the twentieth century, scientists believed that four
distinct glaciations had affected North America and Europe during the Pleistocene
epoch.
This idea was modified in the late twentieth century, when geologists and
oceanographers examining oceanic sediment found fossil evidence of warming and
cooling of the oceans. Ocean sediments presented a much more complete geologic
record of the Pleistocene than continental glacial deposits did. The fossils buried in
Pleistocene and earlier ocean sediments were of foraminifera—small, single-celled
marine organisms that secrete shells of calcium carbonate, or calcite. These shells
differ in their proportion of ordinary oxygen (oxygen-16) and the heavy oxygen
isotope (oxygen-18). The ratio of oxygen-16 to oxygen-18 found in the calcite of a
foraminifer's shell depends on the temperature of the water in which the organism
lived. Different ratios in the shells preserved in various layers of
sediment reveal the temperature changes in the oceans during the Pleistocene
epoch.
Isotopic analysis of shells allowed geologists to measure another glacial effect.
They could trace the growth and shrinkage of continental glaciers, even in parts of
the ocean where there may have been no great change in temperature—around the
equator, for example. The oxygen isotope ratio of the ocean changes as a great deal
of water is withdrawn from it by evaporation and is precipitated as snow to form
[199]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
glacial ice. During glaciations, the lighter oxygen-16 has a greater tendency to
evaporate from the ocean surface than the heavier oxygen-18 does. Thus, more of
the heavy isotope is left behind in the ocean and absorbed by marine organisms.
From this analysis of marine sediments, geologists have learned that there were
many shorter, more regular cycles of glaciation and deglaciation than geologists
had recognized from the glacial drift of the continents alone.
[200]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 20
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[201]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Westward Migration
The story of the westward movement of population in the United States is, in the
main, the story of the expansion of American agriculture—of the development of
new areas for the raising of livestock and the cultivation of wheat, corn, tobacco,
and cotton. After 1815 improved transportation enabled more and more western
farmers to escape a self-sufficient way of life and enter a national market economy.
During periods when commodity prices were high, the rate of westward migration
increased spectacularly. "Old America seemed to be breaking up and moving
westward," observed an English visitor in 1817,during the first great wave of
migration. Emigration to the West reached a peak in the 1830's. Whereas in 1810
only a seventh of the American people lived west of the Appalachian Mountains,
by 1840 more than a third lived there.
Why were these hundreds of thousands of settlers—most of them farmers, some of
them artisans—drawn away from the cleared fields and established cities and
villages of the East? Certain characteristics of American society help to explain
this remarkable migration. The European ancestors of some Americans had for
centuries lived rooted to the same village or piece of land until some religious,
political, or economic crisis uprooted them and drove them across the Atlantic.
Many of those who experienced this sharp break thereafter lacked the ties that had
bound them and their ancestors to a single place. Moreover, European society was
relatively stratified; occupation and social status were inherited. In American
society, however, the class structure was less rigid; some people changed
occupations easily and believed it was their duty to improve their social and
economic position. As a result, many Americans were an inveterately restless,
rootless, and ambitious people. Therefore, these social traits helped to produce the
[202]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
nomadic and daring settlers who kept pushing westward beyond the fringes of
settlement. In addition, there were other immigrants who migrated west in search
of new homes, material success, and better lives.
The West had plenty of attractions: the alluvial river bottoms, the fecund soils of
the rolling forest lands, the black loams of the prairies were tempting to New
England farmers working their rocky, sterile land and to southeastern farmers
plagued with soil depletion and erosion. In 1820 under a new land law, a farm
could be bought for $100. The continued proliferation of banks made it easier for
those without cash to negotiate loans in paper money. Western Farmers borrowed
with the confident expectation that the expanding economy would keep farm prices
high, thus making it easy to repay loans when they fell due.
Transportation was becoming less of a problem for those who wished to move west
and for those who had farm surpluses to send to market.Prior to 1815, western
farmers who did not live on navigable waterways were connected to them only by
dirt roads and mountain trails. Livestock could be driven across the mountains, but
the cost of transporting bulky grains in this fashion was several times greater than
their value in eastern markets. The first step toward an improvement of western
transportation was the construction of turnpikes. These roads made possible a
reduction in transportation costs and thus stimulated the commercialization of
agriculture along their routes.
Two other developments presaged the end of the era of turnpikes and started a
transportation revolution that resulted in increased regional specialization and the
growth of a national market economy. First came the steamboat; although flatboats
and keelboats continued to be important until the 1850’s steamboats
eventually superseded all other craft in the carrying of passengers and freight.
Steamboats were not only faster but also transported upriver freight for about one
[203]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
tenth of what it had previously cost on hand-propelled keelboats. Next came the
Erie Canal, an enormous project in its day, spanning about 350 miles. After the
canal went into operation, the cost per mile of transporting a ton of freight from
Buffalo to New York City declined from nearly 20 cents to less than 1 cent.
Eventually, the western states diverted much of their produce from the rivers to the
Erie Canal, a shorter route to eastern markets.
www.ZabanExam.com
[204]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Early Settlements in the Southwest Asia
The universal global warming at the end of the Ice Age had dramatic effects on
temperate regions of Asia, Europe, and North America. Ice sheets retreated and sea
levels rose. The climatic changes in southwestern Asia were more subtle, in that
they involved shifts in mountain snow lines, rainfall patterns, and vegetation
cover. However, these same cycles of change had momentous impacts on the
sparse human populations of the region. At the end of the Ice Age, no more than a
few thousand foragers lived along the eastern Mediterranean coast, in the Jordan
and Euphrates valleys. Within 2,000 years, the human population of the region
numbered in the tens of thousands, all as a result of village life and
farming. Thanks to new environmental and archaeological discoveries, we now
know something about this remarkable change in local life.
Pollen samples from freshwater lakes in Syria and elsewhere tell us forest cover
expanded rapidly at the end of the Ice Age, for the southwestern Asian climate was
still cooler and considerably wetter than today. Many areas were richer in animal
and plant species than they are now, making them highly favorable for human
occupation. About 9000 B.C., most human settlements lay in the area along the
Mediterranean coast and in the Zagros Mountains of Iran and their foothills. Some
local areas, like the Jordan River valley, the middle Euphrates valley, and some
Zagros valleys, were more densely populated than elsewhere. Here more sedentary
and more complex societies flourished. These people exploited the landscape
intensively, foraging on hill slopes for wild cereal grasses and nuts, while hunting
gazelle and other game on grassy lowlands and in river valleys. Their settlements
contain exotic objects such as seashells, stone bowls, and artifacts made of
[205]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
obsidian(volcanic glass), all traded from afar. This considerable volume of
intercommunity exchange brought a degree of social complexity in its wake.
Thanks to extremely fine-grained excavation and extensive use of flotation
methods (through which seeds are recovered from soil samples), we know a great
deal about the foraging practices of the inhabitants of Abu Hureyra in Syria's
Euphrates valley. Abu Hureyra was founded about 9500B.C, a small village
settlement of cramped pit dwellings (houses dug partially in the soil) with reed
roofs supported by wooden uprights. For the next 1,500 years, its inhabitants
enjoyed a somewhat warmer and damper climate than today, living in a well-
wooded steppe area where wild cereal grasses were abundant. They subsisted off
spring migrations of Persian gazelles from the south. With such a favorable
location, about 300 to 400 people lived in a sizable, permanent settlement. They
were no longer a series of small bands but lived in a large community with more
elaborate social organization, probably grouped into clans of people of common
descent.
The flotation samples from the excavations allowed botanists to study shifts in
plant-collecting habits as if they were looking through a telescope at a changing
landscape. Hundreds of tiny plant remains show how the inhabitants exploited nut
harvests in nearby pistachio and oak forests. However, as the climate dried up, the
forests retreated from the vicinity of the settlement. The inhabitants turned to wild
cereal grasses instead, collecting them by the thousands, while the percentage of
nuts in the diet fell. By 8200B.C., drought conditions were so severe that the
people abandoned their long-established settlement, perhaps dispersing into
smaller camps.
Five centuries later, about 7700B.C., a new village rose on the mound. At first the
inhabitants still hunted gazelle intensively. Then, about 7000 B.C., within the
[206]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
space of a few generations, they switched abruptly to herding domesticated goats
and sheep and to growing einkorn, pulses, and other cereal grasses. Abu Hureyra
grew rapidly until it covered nearly 30 acres. It was a close-knit community of
rectangular, one-story mud-brick houses, joined by narrow lanes and courtyards,
finally abandoned about 5000 B.C.. Many complex factors led to the adoption of
the new economies, not only at Abu Hureyra, but at many other locations such as
'Ain Ghazal, also in Syria, where goat toe bones showing the telltale marks of
abrasion caused by foot tethering (binding) testify to early herding of domestic
stock.
[207]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Fossil Preservation
When one considers the many ways by which organisms are completely destroyed
after death, it is remarkable that fossils are as common as they are. Attack by
scavengers and bacteria, chemical decay, and destruction by erosion and other
geologic agencies make the odds against preservation very high. However, the
chances of escaping complete destruction are vastly improved if the organism
happens to have a mineralized skeleton and dies in a place where it can be quickly
buried by sediment. Both of these conditions are often found on the ocean floors,
where shelled invertebrates (organisms without spines) flourish and are covered by
the continuous rain of sedimentary particles. Although most fossils are found in
marine sedimentary rocks, they also are found in terrestrial deposits left by streams
and lakes. On occasion, animals and plants have been preserved after becoming
immersed in tar or quicksand, trapped in ice or lava flows, or engulfed by rapid
falls of volcanic ash.
The term "fossil" often implies petrifaction, literally a transformation into stone.
After the death of an organism, the soft tissue is ordinarily consumed by
scavengers and bacteria. The empty shell of a snail or clam may be left behind, and
if it is sufficiently durable and resistant to dissolution, it may remain basically
unchanged for a long period of time. Indeed, unaltered shells of marine
invertebrates are known from deposits over 100 million years old. In many marine
creatures, however, the skeleton is composed of a mineral variety of calcium
carbonate called aragonite. Although aragonite has the same composition as the
more familiar mineral known as calcite, it has a different crystal form, is relatively
unstable, and in time changes to the more stable calcite.
[208]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Many other processes may alter the shell of a clam or snail and enhanceits chances
for preservation. Water containing dissolved silica, calcium carbonate, or iron may
circulate through the enclosing sediment and be deposited in cavities such as
marrow cavities and canals in bone once occupied by blood vessels and nerves. In
such cases, the original composition of the bone or shell remains, but the fossil is
made harder and more durable. This addition of a chemically precipitated
substance into pore spaces is termed "permineralization."
Petrifaction may also involve a simultaneous exchange of the original substance of
a dead plant or animal with mineral matter of a different composition. This process
is termed " replacement" because solutions have dissolved the original material and
replaced it with an equal volume of the new substance. Replacement can be a
marvelously preciseprocess, so that details of shell ornamentation, tree rings in
wood, and delicate structures in bone are accurately preserved.
Another type of fossilization, known as carbonization, occurs when soft tissues are
preserved as thin films of carbon. Leaves and tissue of soft-bodied organisms such
as jellyfish or worms may accumulate, become buried and compressed, and lose
their volatile constituents. The carbon often remains behind as a blackened
silhouette.
Although it is certainly true that the possession of hard parts enhances
the prospect of preservation, organisms having soft tissues and organs are also
occasionally preserved. Insects and even small invertebrates have been found
preserved in the hardened resins of conifers and certain other trees. X-ray
examination of thin slabs of rock sometimes reveals the ghostly outlines of
tentacles, digestive tracts, and visual organs of a variety of marine creatures. Soft
parts, including skin, hair, and viscera of ice age mammoths, have been preserved
in frozen soil or in the oozing tar of oil seeps.
[209]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The probability that actual remains of soft tissue will be preserved is improved if
the organism dies in an environment of rapid deposition and oxygen deprivation.
Under such conditions, the destructive effects of bacteria are diminished. The
Middle Eocene Messel Shale (from about 48 million years ago) of Germany
accumulated in such an environment. The shale was deposited in an oxygen-
deficient lake where lethal gases sometimes bubbled up and killed animals. Their
remains accumulated on the floor of the lake and were then covered by clay and
silt. Among the superbly preserved Messel fossils are insects with iridescent
exoskeletons (hard outer coverings), frogs with skin and blood vessels intact, and
even entire small mammals with preserved fur and soft tissue.