1-11
Groundwater
Groundwater is the word used to describe water that saturates the ground, filling all
the available spaces. By far the most abundant type of groundwater is meteoric
water; this is the groundwater that circulates as part of the water cycle. Ordinary
meteoric water is water that has soaked into the ground from the surface, from
precipitation (rain and snow) and from lakes and streams. There it remains,
sometimes for long periods, before emerging at the surface again. At first thought
it seems incrediblethat there can be enough space in the “solid” ground underfoot
to hold all this water.
The necessary space is there, however, in many forms. The commonest spaces are
those among the particles—sand grains and tiny pebbles—of loose, unconsolidated
sand and gravel. Beds of this material, out of sightbeneath the soil, are common.
They are found wherever fast rivers carrying loads of coarse sediment once flowed.
For example, as the great ice sheets that covered North America during the last ice
age steadily melted away, huge volumes of water flowed from them. The water
was always laden with pebbles, gravel, and sand, known as glacial outwash, that
was deposited as the flow slowed down.
The same thing happens to this day, though on a smaller scale, wherever a
sediment-laden river or stream emerges from a mountain valley onto relatively flat
land, dropping its load as the current slows: the water usually spreads out fanwise,
depositing the sediment in the form of a smooth, fan-shaped slope. Sediments are
also dropped where a river slows on entering a lake or the sea, the deposited
sediments are on a lake floor or the seafloor at first, but will be located inland at
some future date, when the sea level falls or the land rises; such beds are
sometimes thousands of meters thick.
[13]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
In lowland country almost any spot on the ground may overlie what was once the
bed of a river that has since become buried by soil; if they are now below the
water’s upper surface (the water table), the gravels and sands of the former
riverbed, and its sandbars, will be saturated with groundwater.
So much for unconsolidated sediments. Consolidated (or cemented) sediments, too,
contain millions of minute water-holding pores. This is because the gaps among
the original grains are often not totally pluggedwith cementing chemicals; also,
parts of the original grains may become dissolved by percolating groundwater,
either while consolidation is taking place or at any time afterwards. The result is
that sandstone, for example, can be as porous as the loose sand from which it was
formed.
Thus a proportion of the total volume of any sediment, loose or cemented, consists
of empty space. Most crystalline rocks are much more solid; a common exception
is basalt, a form of solidified volcanic lava, which is sometimes full of tiny bubbles
that make it very porous.
The proportion of empty space in a rock is known as its porosity. But note that
porosity is not the same as permeability, which measures the ease with which
water can flow through a material; this depends on the sizes of the individual
cavities and the crevices linking them.
Much of the water in a sample of water-saturated sediment or rock will drain from
it if the sample is put in a suitable dry place. But some will remain, clinging to all
solid surfaces. It is held there by the force of surface tension without which water
would drain instantly from any wet surface, leaving it totally dry. The total volume
of water in the saturated sample must therefore be thought of as consisting of water
that can, and water that cannot, drain away.
[14]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The relative amount of these two kinds of water varies greatly from one kind of
rock or sediment to another, even though their porosities may be the same. What
happens depends on pore size. If the pores are large, the water in them will exist as
drops too heavy for surface tension to hold, and it will drain away; but if the pores
are small enough, the water in them will exist as thin films, too light to overcome
the force of surface tension holding them in place; then the water will be firmly
held.
www.ZabanExam.com
[15]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The Origins of Theater
In seeking to describe the origins of theater, one must rely primarily on
speculation, since there is little concrete evidence on which to draw. The most
widely accepted theory, championed by anthropologists in the late nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries, envisions theater as emerging out of myth and ritual. The
process perceived by these anthropologists may be summarized briefly. During the
early stages of its development, a society becomes aware of forces that appear to
influence or control its food supply and well-being. Having little understanding of
natural causes, it attributes both desirable and undesirable occurrences to
supernatural or magical forces, and it searches for means to win the favor of these
forces. Perceiving an apparent connection between certain actions performed by
the group and the result it desires, the group repeats, refines and formalizes those
actions into fixed ceremonies, or rituals.
Stories (myths) may then grow up around a ritual. Frequently the myths include
representatives of those supernatural forces that the rites celebrate or hope to
influence. Performers may wear costumes and masks to represent the mythical
characters or supernatural forces in the rituals or in accompanying celebrations. As
a people becomes more sophisticated, its conceptions of supernatural forces and
causal relationships may change. As a result, it may abandon or modify some rites.
But the myths that have grown up around the rites may continue as part of the
group’s oral tradition and may even come to be acted out under conditions
divorced from these rites. When this occurs, the first step has been taken toward
theater as an autonomous activity, and thereafter entertainment and aesthetic values
may gradually replace the former mystical and socially efficacious concerns.
[16]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Although origin in ritual has long been the most popular, it is by no means the only
theory about how the theater came into being.Storytelling has been proposed as
one alternative. Under this theory, relating and listening to stories are seen as
fundamental human pleasures. Thus, the recalling of an event (a hunt, battle, or
other feat) is elaborated through the narrator’s pantomime and impersonation and
eventually through each role being assumed by a different person.
A closely related theory sees theater as evolving out of dances that are primarily
pantomimic, rhythmical or gymnastic, or from imitations of animal noises and
sounds. Admiration for the performer’s skill, virtuosity, and grace are seen as
motivation for elaborating the activities into fully realized theatrical performances.
In addition to exploring the possible antecedents of theater, scholars have also
theorized about the motives that led people to develop theater. Why did theater
develop, and why was it valued after it ceased to fulfill the function of ritual? Most
answers fall back on the theories about the human mind and basic human needs.
One, set forth by Aristotle in the fourth century B.C., sees humans as naturally
imitative—as taking pleasure in imitating persons, things, and actions and in seeing
such imitations. Another, advanced in the twentieth century, suggests that humans
have a gift for fantasy, through which they seek to reshape reality into more
satisfying forms than those encountered in daily life. Thus, fantasy or fiction (of
which drama is one form) permits people to objectify their anxieties and fears,
confront them, and fulfill their hopes in fiction if not fact. The theater, then, is one
tool whereby people define and understand their world or escape from unpleasant
realities.
But neither the human imitative instinct nor a penchant for fantasy by itself leads
to an autonomous theater. Therefore, additional explanations are needed. One
necessary condition seems to be a somewhat detached view of human problems.
[17]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
For example, one sign of this condition is the appearance of the comic vision,
since comedy requires sufficient detachment to view some deviations from social
norms as ridiculous rather than as serious threats to the welfare of the entire group.
Another condition that contributes to the development of autonomous theater is the
emergence of the aesthetic sense. For example, some early societies ceased to
consider certain rites essential to their well-being and abandoned them,
nevertheless, they retained as parts of their oral tradition the myths that had grown
up around the rites and admired them for their artistic qualities rather than for their
religious usefulness.
[18]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Timberline Vegetation on Mountains
The transition from forest to treeless tundra on a mountain slope is often
a dramatic one. Within a vertical distance of just a few tens of meters, trees
disappear as a life-form and are replaced by low shrubs, herbs, and grasses. This
rapid zone of transition is called the upper timberline or tree line. In many semiarid
areas there is also a lower timberline where the forest passes into steppe or desert
at its lower edge, usually because of a lack of moisture.
The upper timberline, like the snow line, is highest in the tropics and lowest in the
Polar Regions. It ranges from sea level in the Polar Regions to 4,500 meters in the
dry subtropics and 3,500-4,500 meters in the moist tropics. Timberline trees are
normally evergreens, suggesting that these have some advantage over deciduous
trees (those that lose their leaves) in the extreme environments of the upper
timberline. There are some areas, however, where broadleaf deciduous trees form
the timberline. Species of birch, for example, may occur at the timberline in parts
of the Himalayas.
At the upper timberline the trees begin to become twisted and deformed. This is
particularly true for trees in the middle and upper latitudes, which tend
to attain greater heights on ridges, whereas in the tropics the trees reach their
greater heights in the valleys. This is because middle- and upper- latitude
timberlines are strongly influenced by the duration and depth of the snow cover.
As the snow is deeper and lasts longer in the valleys, trees tend to attain greater
heights on the ridges, even though they are more exposed to high-velocity winds
and poor, thin soils there. In the tropics, the valleys appear to be more favorable
because they are less prone to dry out, they have less frost, and they have deeper
soils.
[19]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
There is still no universally agreed-on explanation for why there should be such a
dramatic cessation of tree growth at the upper timberline. Various environmental
factors may play a role. Too much snow, for example, can smother trees, and
avalanches and snow creep can damage or destroy them. Late-lying snow reduces
the effective growing season to the point where seedlings cannot establish
themselves. Wind velocity also increases with altitude and may cause serious stress
for trees, as is made evident by the deformed shapes at high altitudes.Some
scientists have proposed that the presence of increasing levels of ultraviolet light
with elevation may play a role, while browsing and grazing animals like the ibex
may be another contributing factor. Probably the most important environmental
factor is temperature, for if the growing season is too short and temperatures are
too low, tree shoots and buds cannot mature sufficiently to survive the winter
months.
Above the tree line there is a zone that is generally called alpine
tundra. Immediately adjacent to the timberline, the tundra consists of a fairly
complete cover of low-lying shrubs, herbs, and grasses, while higher up the
number and diversity of species decrease until there is much bare ground with
occasional mosses and lichens and some prostrate cushion plants. Some plants can
even survive in favorable microhabitats above the snow line. The highest plants in
the world occur at around 6,100 meters on Makalu in the Himalayas. At this great
height, rocks, warmed by the sun, melt small snowdrifts.
The most striking characteristic of the plants of the alpine zone is their low growth
form. This enables them to avoid the worst rigors of high winds and permits them
to make use of the higher temperatures immediately adjacent to the ground surface.
In an area where low temperatures are limiting to life, the importance of the
additional heat near the surface is crucial. The low growth form can also permit the
[20]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
plants to take advantage of the insulation provided by a winter snow cover. In the
equatorial mountains the low growth form is less prevalent.
[21]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 02
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[22]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Desert Formation
The deserts, which already occupy approximately a fourth of the Earth's land
surface, have in recent decades been increasing at an alarming pace. The expansion
of desert-like conditions into areas where they did not previously exist is called
desertification. It has been estimated that an additional one-fourth of the Earth's
land surface is threatened by this process.
Desertification is accomplished primarily through the loss of stabilizing natural
vegetation and the subsequent accelerated erosion of the soil by wind and water. In
some cases the loose soil is blown completely away, leaving a stony surface. In
other cases, the finer particles may be removed, while the sand-sized particles are
accumulated to form mobile hills or ridges of sand.
Even in the areas that retain a soil cover, the reduction of vegetation typically
results in the loss of the soil's ability to absorb substantial quantities of water. The
impact of raindrops on the loose soil tends to transfer fine clay particles into the
tiniest soil spaces, sealing them and producing a surface that allows very little
water penetration. Water absorption is greatly reduced; consequently runoff is
increased, resulting in accelerated erosion rates. The gradual drying of the soil
caused by its diminished ability to absorb water results in the further loss of
vegetation, so that a cycle of progressive surface deterioration is established.
In some regions, the increase in desert areas is occurring largely as the result of a
trend toward drier climatic conditions. Continued gradual global warming has
produced an increase in aridity for some areas over the past few thousand years.
The process may be accelerated in subsequent decades if global warming resulting
from air pollution seriously increases.
[23]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
There is little doubt, however, that desertification in most areas results primarily
from human activities rather than natural processes. The semiarid lands bordering
the deserts exist in a delicate ecological balance and are limited in their potential to
adjust to increased environmental pressures. Expanding populations are subjecting
the land to increasing pressures to provide them with food and fuel. In wet periods,
the land may be able to respond to these stresses. During the dry periods that are
common phenomena along the desert margins, though, the pressure on the land is
often far in excess of its diminished capacity, and desertification results.
Four specific activities have been identified as major contributors to the
desertification processes: overcultivation, overgrazing, firewood gathering, and
overirrigation. The cultivation of crops has expanded into progressively drier
regions as population densities have grown. These regions are especially likely to
have periods of severe dryness, so that crop failures are common. Since the raising
of most crops necessitates the prior removal of the natural vegetation, crop failures
leave extensive tracts of land devoid of a plant cover and susceptible to wind and
water erosion.
The raising of livestock is a major economic activity in semiarid lands, where
grasses are generally the dominant type of natural vegetation. The consequences of
an excessive number of livestock grazing in an area are the reduction of the
vegetation cover and the trampling and pulverization of the soil. This is usually
followed by the drying of the soil and accelerated erosion.
Firewood is the chief fuel used for cooking and heating in many countries. The
increased pressures of expanding populations have led to the removal of woody
plants so that many cities and towns are surrounded by large areas completely
lacking in trees and shrubs. The increasing use of dried animal waste as a substitute
[24]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
fuel has also hurt the soil because this valuable soil conditioner and source of plant
nutrients is no longer being returned to the land.
The final major human cause of desertification is soil salinization resulting from
overirrigation. Excess water from irrigation sinks down into the water table. If no
drainage system exists, the water table rises, bringing dissolved salts to the surface.
The water evaporates and the salts are left behind, creating a white crustal layer
that prevents air and water from reaching the underlying soil.
The extreme seriousness of desertification results from the vast areas of land and
the tremendous numbers of people affected, as well as from the great difficulty of
reversing or even slowing the process. Once the soil has been removed by erosion,
only the passage of centuries or millennia will enable new soil to form. In areas
where considerable soil still remains, though, a rigorously enforced program of
land protection and cover-crop planting may make it possible to reverse the present
deterioration of the surface.
www.ZabanExam.com
[25]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The Origins of Cetaceans
It should be obvious that cetaceans—whales, porpoises, and dolphins—are
mammals. They breathe through lungs, not through gills, and give birth to live
young. Their streamlined bodies, the absence of hind legs, and the presence of a
fluke and blowhole cannot disguise their affinities with land dwelling mammals.
However, unlike the cases of sea otters and pinnipeds (seals, sea lions, and
walruses, whose limbs are functional both on land and at sea), it is not easy to
envision what the first whales looked like. Extinct but already fully marine
cetaceans are known from the fossil record. How was the gap between a walking
mammal and a swimming whale bridged? Missing until recently were fossils
clearly intermediate, or transitional, between land mammals and cetaceans.
Very exciting discoveries have finally allowed scientists to reconstruct the most
likely origins of cetaceans. In 1979, a team looking for fossils in northern Pakistan
found what proved to be the oldest fossil whale. The fossil was officially named
Pakicetus in honor of the country where the discovery was made. Pakicetus was
found embedded in rocks formed from river deposits that were 52 million years
old. The river that formed these deposits was actually not far from an ancient ocean
known as the Tethys Sea.
The fossil consists of a complete skull of an archaeocyte, an extinct group of
ancestors of modern cetaceans. Although limited to a skull, the Pakicetus fossil
provides precious details on the origins of cetaceans. The skull is cetacean-like but
its jawbones lack the enlarged space that is filled with fat or oil and used for
receiving underwater sound in modern whales. Pakicetus probably detected sound
through the ear opening as in land mammals. The skull also lacks a blowhole,
another cetacean adaptation for diving. Other features, however, show experts that
[26]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Pakicetus is a transitional form between a group of extinct flesh-eating mammals,
the mesonychids, and cetaceans. It has been suggested that Pakicetus fed on fish in
shallow water and was not yet adapted for life in the open ocean. It probably bred
and gave birth on land.
Another major discovery was made in Egypt in 1989. Several skeletons of another
early whale, Basilosaurus, were found in sediments left by the Tethys Sea and
now exposed in the Sahara desert. This whale lived around 40 million years ago,
12 million years after Pakicetus. Many incomplete skeletons were found but they
included, for the first time in an archaeocyte, a complete hind leg that features a
foot with three tiny toes. Such legs would have been far too small to have
supported the 50-foot-long Basilosaurus on land. Basilosaurus was undoubtedly a
fully marine whale with possibly nonfunctional, or vestigial, hind legs.
An even more exciting find was reported in 1994, also from Pakistan. The now
extinct whale Ambulocetus natans ("the walking whale that swam") lived in the
Tethys Sea 49 million years ago. It lived around 3 million years after Pakicetus but
9 million before Basilosaurus. The fossil luckily includes a good portion of the
hind legs. The legs were strong and ended in long feet very much like those of a
modern pinniped. The legs were certainly functional both on land and at sea. The
whale retained a tail and lacked a fluke, the major means of locomotion in modern
cetaceans. The structure of the backbone shows, however, that Ambulocetus swam
like modern whales by moving the rear portion of its body up and down, even
though a fluke was missing. The large hind legs were used for propulsion in water.
On land, where it probably bred and gave birth, Ambulocetus may have moved
around very much like a modern sea lion. It was undoubtedly a whale that linked
life on land with life at sea.
[27]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Early Cinema
The cinema did not emerge as a form of mass consumption until its technology
evolved from the initial "peepshow" format to the point where images were
projected on a screen in a darkened theater. In the peepshow format, a film was
viewed through a small opening in a machine that was created for that purpose.
Thomas Edison's peepshow device, the Kinetoscope, was introduced to the public
in 1894. It was designed for use in Kinetoscope parlors, or arcades, which
contained only a few individual machines and permitted only one customer to view
a short, 50-foot film at any one time. The first Kinetoscope parlors contained five
machines. For the price of 25 cents (or 5 cents per machine), customers moved
from machine to machine to watch five different films (or, in the case of famous
prizefights, successive rounds of a single fight).
These Kinetoscope arcades were modeled on phonograph parlors, which had
proven successful for Edison several years earlier. In the phonograph parlors,
customers listened to recordings through individual ear tubes, moving from one
machine to the next to hear different recorded speeches or pieces of music. The
Kinetoscope parlors functioned in a similar way. Edison was more interested in the
sale of Kinetoscopes (for roughly $1,000 apiece) to these parlors than in the films
that would be run in them (which cost approximately $10 to $15 each). He refused
to develop projection technology, reasoning that if he made and sold projectors,
then exhibitors would purchase only one machine-a projector-from him instead of
several.
Exhibitors, however, wanted to maximize their profits, which they could do
more readily by projecting a handful of films to hundreds of customers at a time
(rather than one at a time) and by charging 25 to 50 cents admission. About a year
[28]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
after the opening of the first Kinetoscope parlor in 1894, showmen such as Louis
and Auguste Lumiere, Thomas Armat and Charles Francis Jenkins, and Orville and
Woodville Latham (with the assistance of Edison's former assistant, William
Dickson) perfected projection devices. These early projection devices were used in
vaudeville theaters, legitimate theaters, local town halls, makeshift storefront
theaters, fairgrounds, and amusement parks to show films to a mass audience.
With the advent of projection in 1895-1896, motion pictures became the ultimate
form of mass consumption. Previously, large audiences had viewed spectacles at
the theater, where vaudeville, popular dramas, musical and minstrel shows,
classical plays, lectures, and slide-and-lantern shows had been presented to several
hundred spectators at a time. But the movies differed significantly from these other
forms of entertainment, which depended on either live performance or (in the case
of the slide-and-lantern shows) the active involvement of a master of ceremonies
who assembled the final program.
Although early exhibitors regularly accompanied movies with live acts, the
substance of the movies themselves is mass-produced, prerecorded material that
can easily be reproduced by theaters with little or no active participation by the
exhibitor. Even though early exhibitors shaped their film programs by mixing films
and other entertainments together in whichever way they thought would be most
attractive to audiences or by accompanying them with lectures, their creative
control remained limited. What audiences came to see was the technological
marvel of the movies; the lifelike reproduction of the commonplace motion of
trains, of waves striking the shore, and of people walking in the street; and the
magic made possible by trick photography and the manipulation of the camera.
With the advent of projection, the viewer's relationship with the image was no
longer private, as it had been with earlier peepshow devices such as the
[29]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Kinetoscope and the Mutoscope, which was a similar machine that reproduced
motion by means of successive images on individual photographic cards instead of
on strips of celluloid. It suddenly became public—an experience that the viewer
shared with dozens, scores, and even hundreds of others. At the same time, the
image that the spectator looked at expanded from the minuscule peepshow
dimensions of 1 or 2 inches (in height) to the life-size proportions of 6 or 9 feet.
[30]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 03
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[31]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Architecture
Architecture is the art and science of designing structures that organize and enclose
space for practical and symbolic purposes. Because architecture grows out of
human needs and aspirations, it clearly communicates cultural values. Of all the
visual arts, architecture affects our lives most directly for it determines the
character of the human environment in major ways.
Architecture is a three-dimensional form. It utilizes space, mass, texture, line, light,
and color. To be architecture, a building must achieve a working harmony with a
variety of elements. Humans instinctively seek structures that will shelter
and enhance their way of life. It is the work of architects to create buildings that
are not simply constructions but also offer inspiration and delight. Buildings
contribute to human life when they provide shelter, enrich space, complement their
site, suit the climate, and are economically feasible. The client who pays for the
building and defines its function is an important member of the architectural team.
The mediocre design of many contemporary buildings can be traced to both clients
and architects.
In order for the structure to achieve the size and strength necessary to meet its
purpose, architecture employs methods of support that, because they are based on
physical laws, have changed little since people first discovered them—even while
building materials have changed dramatically. The world’s architectural structures
have also been devised in relation to the objective limitations of materials.
Structures can be analyzed in terms of how they deal with downward forces
created by gravity. They are designed to withstand the forces of compression
(pushing together), tension (pulling apart), bending, or a combination of these in
different parts of the structure.
[32]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Even development in architecture has been the result of major technological
changes. Materials and methods of construction are integral parts of the design of
architecture structures. In earlier times it was necessary to design structural
systems suitable for the materials that were available, such as wood, stone, brick.
Today technology has progressed to the point where it is possible to invent new
building materials to suit the type of structure desired. Enormous changes in
materials and techniques of construction within the last few generations have made
it possible to enclose space with much greater ease and speed and with a minimum
of material. Progress in this area can be measured by the difference in weight
between buildings built now and those of comparable size built one hundred years
ago.
Modern architectural forms generally have three separate components comparable
to elements of the human body: a supporting skeleton or frame, an outer skin
enclosing the interior spaces, and equipment, similar to the body’s vital organs and
systems. The equipment includes plumbing, electrical wiring, hot water, and air-
conditioning. Of course in early architecture—such as igloos and adobe
structures—there was no such equipment, and the skeleton and skin were often
one.
Much of the world’s great architecture has been constructed of stone because of its
beauty, permanence, and availability. In the past, whole cities grew from
the arduous task of cutting and piling stone upon. Some of the world’s finest stone
architecture can be seen in the ruins of the ancient Inca city of Machu Picchu high
in the eastern Andes Mountains of Peru. The doorways and windows are made
possible by placing over the open spaces thick stone beams that support the weight
from above. A structural invention had to be made before the physical limitations
of stone could be overcome and new architectural forms could be created. That
[33]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
invention was the arch, a curved structure originally made of separate stone or
brick segments. The arch was used by the early cultures of the Mediterranean area
chiefly for underground drains, but it was the Romans who first developed and
used the arch extensively in aboveground structures. Roman builders perfected the
semicircular arch made of separate blocks of stone. As a method of spanning
space, the arch can support greater weight than a horizontal beam. It works in
compression to divert the weight above it out to the sides, where the weight is
borne by the vertical elements on either side of the arch. The arch is among the
many important structural breakthroughs that have characterized architecture
throughout the centuries.
www.ZabanExam.com
[34]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Depletion of the Ogallala Aquifer
The vast grasslands of the High Plains in the central United States were settled by
farmers and ranchers in the 1880s. This region has a semiarid climate, and for 50
years after its settlement, it supported a low-intensity agricultural economy of
cattle ranching and wheat farming. In the early twentieth century, however, it was
discovered that much of the High Plains was underlain by a huge aquifer (a rock
layer containing large quantities of groundwater). This aquifer was named the
Ogallala aquifer after the Ogallala Sioux Indians, who once inhabited the region
The Ogallala aquifer is a sandstone formation that underlies some 583,000 square
kilometers of land extending from northwestern Texas to southern South Dakota.
Water from rains and melting snows has been accumulating in the Ogallala for the
past 30,000 years. Estimates indicate that the aquifer contains enough water to fill
Lake Huron, but unfortunately, under the semiarid climatic conditions that
presently exist in the region, rates of addition to the aquifer are minimal,
amounting to about half a centimeter a year.
The first wells were drilled into the Ogallala during the drought years of the early
1930s. The ensuing rapid expansion of irrigation agriculture, especially from the
1950s onward, transformed the economy of the region. More than 100,000 wells
now tap the Ogallala. Modern irrigation devices, each capable of spraying 4.5
million liters of water a day, have produced a landscape dominated by geometric
patterns of circular green islands of crops. Ogallala water has enabled the High
Plains region to supply significant amounts of the cotton, sorghum, wheat, and
corn grown in the United States. In addition, 40 percent of American grain-fed beef
cattle are fattened here.
[35]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
This unprecedented development of a finite groundwater resource with an almost
negligible natural recharge rate—that is, virtually no natural water source to
replenish the water supply—has caused water tables in the region to fall
drastically. In the 1930s, wells encountered plentiful water at a depth of about 15
meters; currently, they must be dug to depths of 45 to 60 meters or more. In places,
the water table is declining at a rate of a meter a year, necessitating the periodic
deepening of wells and the use of ever-more-powerful pumps. It is estimated that
at current withdrawal rates, much of the aquifer will run dry within 40 years. The
situation is most critical in Texas, where the climate is driest, the greatest amount
of water is being pumped, and the aquifer contains the least water. It is projected
that the remaining Ogallala water will, by the year 2030, support only 35 to 40
percent of the irrigated acreage in Texas that is supported in 1980.
The reaction of farmers to the inevitable depletion of the Ogallala varies. Many
have been attempting to conserve water by irrigating less frequently or by
switching to crops that require less water. Others, however, have adopted the
philosophy that it is best to use the water while it is still economically profitable to
do so and to concentrate on high-value crops such as cotton. The incentive of the
farmers who wish to conserve water is reduced by their knowledge that many of
their neighbors are profiting by using great amounts of water, and in the process
are drawing down the entire region’s water supplies.
In the face of the upcoming water supply crisis, a number of grandiose schemes
have been developed to transport vast quantities of water by canal or pipeline from
the Mississippi, the Missouri, or the Arkansas rivers. Unfortunately, the cost of
water obtained through any of these schemes would increase pumping costs at least
tenfold, making the cost of irrigated agricultural products from the region
uncompetitive on the national and international markets. Somewhat more
[36]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
promising have been recent experiments for releasing capillary water (water in the
soil) above the water table by injecting compressed air into the ground. Even if this
process proves successful, however, it would almost triple water costs. Genetic
engineering also may provide a partial solution, as new strains of drought-resistant
crops continue to be developed. Whatever the final answer to the water crisis may
be, it is evident that within the High Plains, irrigation water will never again be the
abundant, inexpensive resource it was during the agricultural boom years of the
mid-twentieth century.
[37]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The Long-Term Stability of Ecosystems
Plant communities assemble themselves flexibly, and their particularstructure
depends on the specific history of the area. Ecologists use the term “succession” to
refer to the changes that happen in plant communities and ecosystems over time.
The first community in a succession is called a pioneer community, while the long-
lived community at the end of succession is called a climax community. Pioneer
and successional plant communities are said to change over periods from 1 to 500
years. These changes—in plant numbers and the mix of species—are cumulative.
Climax communities themselves change but over periods of time greater than
about 500 years.
An ecologist who studies a pond today may well find it relatively unchanged in a
year’s time. Individual fish may be replaced, but the number of fish will tend to be
the same from one year to the next. We can say that the properties of an ecosystem
are more stable than the individual organisms that compose the ecosystem.
At one time, ecologists believed that species diversity made ecosystems stable.
They believed that the greater the diversity the more stable the ecosystem. Support
for this idea came from the observation that long-lasting climax communities
usually have more complex food webs and more species diversity than pioneer
communities. Ecologists concluded that the apparent stability of climax
ecosystems depended on their complexity. To take an extreme example, farmlands
dominated by a single crop are so unstable that one year of bad weather or the
invasion of a single pest can destroy the entire crop. In contrast, a complex climax
community, such as a temperate forest, will tolerate considerable damage from
weather to pests.
[38]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The question of ecosystem stability is complicated, however. The first problem is
that ecologists do not all agree what “stability” means. Stability can be defined as
simply lack of change. In that case, the climax community would be considered the
most stable, since, by definition, it changes the least over time. Alternatively,
stability can be defined as the speed with which an ecosystem returns to a
particular form following a major disturbance, such as a fire. This kind of stability
is also called resilience. In that case, climax communities would be the most fragile
and the least stable, since they can require hundreds of years to return to the climax
state.
Even the kind of stability defined as simple lack of change is not always associated
with maximum diversity. At least in temperate zones, maximum diversity is often
found in mid-successional stages, not in the climax community. Once a redwood
forest matures, for example, the kinds of species and the number of individuals
growing on the forest floor are reduced. In general, diversity, by itself, does not
ensure stability. Mathematical models of ecosystems likewise suggest that
diversity does not guarantee ecosystem stability—just the opposite, in fact. A more
complicated system is, in general, more likely than a simple system to break
down. A fifteen-speed racing bicycle is more likely to break down than a child's
tricycle.
Ecologists are especially interested to know what factors contribute to the
resilience of communities because climax communities all over the world are being
severely damaged or destroyed by human activities. The destruction caused by the
volcanic explosion of Mount St. Helens, in the northwestern United States, for
example, pales in comparison to the destruction caused by humans. We need to
know what aspects of a community are most important to the community’s
resistance to destruction, as well as its recovery.
[39]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Many ecologists now think that the relative long-term stability of climax
communities comes not from diversity but from the “patchiness” of the
environment, an environment that varies from place to place supports more kinds
of organisms than an environment that is uniform. A local population that goes
extinct is quickly replaced by immigrants from an adjacent community. Even if the
new population is of a different species, it can approximately fill the niche vacated
by the extinct population and keep the food web intact.
[40]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 04
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[41]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Deer Populations of the Puget Sound
Two species of deer have been prevalent in the Puget Sound area of Washington
State in the Pacific Northwest of the United States. The black-tailed deer, a
lowland, west-side cousin of the mule deer of eastern Washington, is now the most
common. The other species, the Columbian white-tailed deer, in earlier times was
common in the open prairie country; it is now restricted to the low, marshy islands
and flood plains along the lower Columbia River.
Nearly any kind of plant of the forest understory can be part of a deer's diet. Where
the forest inhibits the growth of grass and other meadow plants, the black-tailed
deer browses on huckleberry, salal, dogwood, and almost any other shrub or herb.
But this is fair-weather feeding. What keeps the black-tailed deer alive in the
harsher seasons of plant decay and dormancy? One compensation for not
hibernating is the built-in urge to migrate. Deer may move from high-elevation
browse areas in summer down to the lowland areas in late fall. Even with snow on
the ground, the high bushy understory is exposed; also snow and wind bring down
leafy branches of cedar, hemlock, red alder, and other arboreal fodder.
The numbers of deer have fluctuated markedly since the entry of Europeans into
Puget Sound country. The early explorers and settlers told of abundant deer in the
early 1800s and yet almost in the same breath bemoaned the lack of this succulent
game animal. Famous explorers of the north American frontier, Lewis and Clark
arrived at the mouth of the Columbia River on November 14, 1805, in nearly
starved circumstances. They had experienced great difficulty finding game west of
the Rockies and not until the second of December did they kill their first elk. To
keep 40 people alive that winter, they consumed approximately 150 elk and 20
deer. And when game moved out of the lowlands in early spring, the expedition
[42]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
decided to return east rather than face possible starvation. Later on in the early
years of the nineteenth century, when Fort Vancouver became the headquarters of
the Hudson's Bay Company, deer populations continued to fluctuate. David
Douglas, Scottish botanical explorer of the 1830s, found a disturbing change in the
animal life around the fort during the period between his first visit in 1825 and his
final contact with the fort in 1832. A recent Douglas biographer states:" The deer
which once picturesquely dotted the meadows around the fort were gone [in 1832],
hunted to extermination in order to protect the crops.
Reduction in numbers of game should have boded ill for their survival in later
times. A worsening of the plight of deer was to be expected as settlers encroached
on the land, logging, burning, and clearing, eventually replacing a wilderness
landscape with roads, cities, towns, and factories. No doubt the numbers of deer
declined still further. Recall the fate of the Columbian white-tailed deer, now in a
protected status. But for the black-tailed deer, human pressure has had just the
opposite effect. Wildlife zoologist Helmut Buechner(1953), in reviewing the nature
of biotic changes in Washington through recorded time, says that "since the early
1940s, the state has had more deer than at any other time in its history, the winter
population fluctuating around approximately 320,000 deer (mule and black-tailed
deer), which will yield about 65,000 of either sex and any age annually for
an indefinite period."
The causes of this population rebound are consequences of other human actions.
First, the major predators of deer—wolves, cougar, and lynx—have been greatly
reduced in numbers. Second, conservation has been insured by limiting times for
and types of hunting. But the most profound reason for the restoration of high
population numbers has been the fate of the forests. Great tracts of lowland country
deforested by logging, fire, or both have become ideal feeding grounds of deer. In
[43]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
addition to finding an increase of suitable browse, like huckleberry and vine maple,
Arthur Einarsen, longtime game biologist in the Pacific Northwest, found quality
of browse in the open areas to be substantially more nutritive. The protein content
of shade-grown vegetation, for example, was much lower than that for plants
grown in clearings.
www.ZabanExam.com
[44]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Cave Art in Europe
The earliest discovered traces of art are beads and carvings, and then paintings,
from sites dating back to the Upper Paleolithic period. We might expect that early
artistic efforts would be crude, but the cave paintings of Spain and southern France
show a marked degree of skill. So do the naturalistic paintings on slabs of stone
excavated in southern Africa. Some of those slabs appear to have been painted as
much as 28,000 years ago, which suggests that painting in Africa is as old as
painting in Europe. But painting may be even older than that. The early Australians
may have painted on the walls of rock shelters and cliff faces at least 30,000 years
ago, and maybe as much as 60,000 years ago.
The researchers Peter Ucko and Andree Rosenfeld identified
three principal locations of paintings in the caves of western Europe: (1) in
obviously inhabited rock shelters and cave entrances; (2) in galleries immediately
off the inhabited areas of caves; and (3) in the inner reaches of caves, whose
difficulty of access has been interpreted by some as a sign that magical-religious
activities were performed there.
The subjects of the paintings are mostly animals. The paintings rest on bare walls,
with no backdrops or environmental trappings. Perhaps, like many contemporary
peoples, Upper Paleolithic men and women believed that the drawing of a human
image could cause death or injury, and if that were indeed their belief, it might
explain why human figures are rarely depicted in cave art. Another explanation for
the focus on animals might be that these people sought to improve their luck at
hunting. This theory is suggested by evidence of chips in the painted figures,
perhaps made by spears thrown at the drawings. But if improving their hunting
luck was the chief motivation for the paintings, it is difficult to explain why only a
[45]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
few show signs of having been speared.Perhaps the paintings were inspired by the
need to increase the supply of animals. Cave art seems to have reached a peak
toward the end of the Upper Paleolithic period, when the herds of game were
decreasing.
The particular symbolic significance of the cave paintings in southwestern France
is more explicitly revealed, perhaps, by the results of a study conducted by
researchers Patricia Rice and Ann Paterson. The data they present suggest that the
animals portrayed in the cave paintings were mostly the ones that the painters
preferred for meat and for materials such as hides. For example, wild cattle
(bovines) and horses are portrayed more often than we would expect by chance,
probably because they were larger and heavier (meatier) than other animals in the
environment. In addition, the paintings mostly portray animals that the painters
may have feared the most because of their size, speed, natural weapons such as
tusks and horns, and the unpredictability of their behavior. That is, mammoths,
bovines, and horses are portrayed more often than deer and reindeer. Thus, the
paintings are consistent with the idea that the art is related to the importance of
hunting in the economy of Upper Paleolithic people. Consistent with this idea,
according to the investigators, is the fact that the art of the cultural period that
followed the Upper Paleolithic also seems to reflect how people got their food. But
in that period, when getting food no longer depended on hunting large game
animals (because they were becoming extinct), the art ceased to focus on portrayals
of animals.
Upper Paleolithic art was not confined to cave paintings. Many shafts of spears and
similar objects were decorated with figures of animals. The anthropologist
Alexander Marshack has an interesting interpretation of some of the engravings
made during the Upper Paleolithic. He believes that as far back as 30,000 B.C.,
[46]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
hunters may have used a system of notation, engraved on bone and stone, to mark
phases of the Moon. If this is true, it would mean that Upper Paleolithic people
were capable of complex thought and were consciously aware of their
environment. In addition to other artworks, figurines representing the human
female in exaggerated form have also been found at Upper Paleolithic sites. It has
been suggested that these figurines were an ideal type or an expression of a desire
for fertility.
[47]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Petroleum Resources
Petroleum, consisting of crude oil and natural gas, seems to originate from organic
matter in marine sediment. Microscopic organisms settle to the seafloor
and accumulate in marine mud. The organic matter may partially decompose, using
up the dissolved oxygen in the sediment. As soon as the oxygen is gone, decay
stops and the remaining organic matter is preserved.
Continued sedimentation—the process of deposits’ settling on the sea bottom—
buries the organic matter and subjects it to higher temperatures and pressures,
which convert the organic matter to oil and gas. As muddy sediments are pressed
together, the gas and small droplets of oil may be squeezed out of the mud and may
move into sandy layers nearby. Over long periods of time (millions of years),
accumulations of gas and oil can collect in the sandy layers. Both oil and gas are
less dense than water, so they generally tend to rise upward through water-
saturated rock and sediment.
Oil pools are valuable underground accumulations of oil, and oil fields are regions
underlain by one or more oil pools. When an oil pool or field has been discovered,
wells are drilled into the ground. Permanent towers, called derricks, used to be
built to handle the long sections of drilling pipe. Now portable drilling machines
are set up and are then dismantled and removed. When the well reaches a pool, oil
usually rises up the well because of its density difference with water beneath it or
because of the pressure of expanding gas trapped above it. Although this rise of oil
is almost always carefully controlled today, spouts of oil, or gushers, were
common in the past. Gas pressure gradually dies out, and oil is pumped from the
well. Water or steam may be pumped down adjacent wells to help push the oil out.
At a refinery, the crude oil from underground is separated into natural gas,
[48]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
gasoline, kerosene, and various oils. Petrochemicals such as dyes, fertilizer, and
plastic are also manufactured from the petroleum.
As oil becomes increasingly difficult to find, the search for it is extended into
more-hostile environments. The development of the oil field on the North Slope of
Alaska and the construction of the Alaska pipeline are examples of the great
expense and difficulty involved in new oil discoveries. Offshore drilling platforms
extend the search for oil to the ocean’s continental shelves—those
gently sloping submarine regions at the edges of the continents. More than one-
quarter of the world’s oil and almost one-fifth of the world’s natural gas come
from offshore, even though offshore drilling is six to seven times more expensive
than drilling on land. A significant part of this oil and gas comes from under the
North Sea between Great Britain and Norway.
Of course, there is far more oil underground than can be recovered. It may be in a
pool too small or too far from a potential market to justify the expense of drilling.
Some oil lies under regions where drilling is forbidden, such as national parks or
other public lands. Even given the best extraction techniques, only about 30 to 40
percent of the oil in a given pool can be brought to the surface. The rest is far too
difficult to extract and has to remain underground.
Moreover, getting petroleum out of the ground and from under the sea and to the
consumer can create environmental problems anywhere along the line. Pipelines
carrying oil can be broken by faults or landslides, causing serious oil spills.
Spillage from huge oil-carrying cargo ships, called tankers, involved in collisions
or accidental groundings (such as the one off Alaska in 1989) can create oil slicks
at sea. Offshore platforms may also lose oil, creating oil slicks that drift ashore
and foul the beaches, harming the environment. Sometimes, the ground at an oil
field may subside as oil is removed. The Wilmington field near Long Beach,
[49]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
California, has subsided nine meters in 50 years; protective barriers have had to be
built to prevent seawater from flooding the area. Finally, the refining and burning
of petroleum and its products can cause air pollution. Advancing technology and
strict laws, however, are helping control some of these adverse environmental
effects.
[50]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 05
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[51]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Minerals and Plants
Research has shown that certain minerals are required by plants for normal growth
and development. The soil is the source of these minerals, which are absorbed by
the plant with the water from the soil. Even nitrogen, which is a gas in its
elemental state, is normally absorbed from the soil as nitrate ions. Some soils are
notoriously deficient in micro nutrients and are therefore unable to support most
plant life. So-called serpentine soils, for example, are deficient in calcium, and
only plants able to tolerate low levels of this mineral can survive. In modern
agriculture, mineral depletion of soils is a major concern, since harvesting crops
interrupts the recycling of nutrients back to the soil.
Mineral deficiencies can often be detected by specific symptoms such as chlorosis
(loss of chlorophyll resulting in yellow or white leaf tissue), necrosis (isolated dead
patches), anthocyanin formation (development of deep red pigmentation of leaves
or stem), stunted growth, and development of woody tissue in an herbaceous plant.
Soils are most commonly deficient in nitrogen and phosphorus. Nitrogen-deficient
plants exhibit many of the symptoms just described. Leaves develop chlorosis;
stems are short and slender, and anthocyanin discoloration occurs on stems,
petioles, and lower leaf surfaces. Phosphorus-deficient plants are often stunted,
with leaves turning a characteristic dark green, often with the accumulation of
anthocyanin. Typically, older leaves are affected first as the phosphorus is
mobilized to young growing tissue. Iron deficiency is characterized by chlorosis
between veins in young leaves.
Much of the research on nutrient deficiencies is based on growing plants
hydroponically, that is, in soilless liquid nutrient solutions. This technique allows
researchers to create solutions that selectively omit certain nutrients and then
[52]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
observe the resulting effects on the plants. Hydroponics has applications beyond
basic research, since it facilitatesthe growing of greenhouse vegetables during
winter. Aeroponics, a technique in which plants are suspended and the roots misted
with a nutrient solution, is another method for growing plants without soil.
While mineral deficiencies can limit the growth of plants, an overabundance of
certain minerals can be toxic and can also limit growth. Saline soils, which have
high concentrations of sodium chloride and other salts, limit plant growth, and
research continues to focus on developing salt-tolerant varieties of agricultural
crops. Research has focused on the toxic effects of heavy metals such as lead,
cadmium, mercury, and aluminum; however, even copper and zinc, which are
essential elements, can become toxic in high concentrations. Although most plants
cannot survive in these soils, certain plants have the ability to tolerate high levels
of these minerals.
Scientists have known for some time that certain plants, called hyperaccumulators,
can concentrate minerals at levels a hundredfold or greater than normal. A survey
of known hyperaccumulators identified that 75 percent of them amassed nickel,
cobalt, copper, zinc, manganese, lead, and cadmium are other minerals of
choice.Hyperaccumulators run the entire range of the plant world. They may
be herbs, shrubs, or trees. Many members of the mustard family, spurge family,
legume family, and grass family are top hyperaccumulators. Many are found in
tropical and subtropical areas of the world, where accumulation of high
concentrations of metals may afford some protection against plant-eating insects
and microbial pathogens.
Only recently have investigators considered using these plants to clean up soil and
waste sites that have been contaminated by toxic levels of heavy metals–an
environmentally friendly approach known as phytoremediation. This scenario
[53]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
begins with the planting of hyperaccumulating species in the target area, such as an
abandoned mine or an irrigation pond contaminated by runoff. Toxic minerals
would first be absorbed by roots but later relocated to the stem and leaves. A
harvest of the shoots would remove the toxic compounds off site to be burned or
composted to recover the metal for industrial uses. After several years of
cultivation and harvest, the site would be restored at a cost much lower than the
price of excavation and reburial, the standard practice for remediation of
contaminated soils. For examples, in field trials, the plant alpine pennycress
removed zinc and cadmium from soils near a zinc smelter, and Indian mustard,
native to Pakistan and India, has been effective in reducing levels of selenium salts
by 50 percent in contaminated soils.
www.ZabanExam.com
[54]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The Origin of the Pacific Island People
The greater Pacific region, traditionally called Oceania, consists of three cultural
areas: Melanesia, Micronesia, and Polynesia. Melanesia, in the southwest Pacific,
contains the large islands of New Guinea, the Solomons, Vanuatu, and New
Caledonia. Micronesia, the area north of Melanesia, consists primarily of small
scattered islands. Polynesia is the central Pacific area in the great triangle defined
by Hawaii, Easter Island, and New Zealand. Before the arrival of Europeans, the
islands in the two largest cultural areas, Polynesia and Micronesia, together
contained a population estimated at 700,000.
Speculation on the origin of these Pacific islanders began as soon as outsiders
encountered them, in the absence of solid linguistic, archaeological, and biological
data, many fanciful and mutually exclusivetheories were devised. Pacific islanders
are variously thought to have come from North America, South America, Egypt,
Israel, and India, as well as Southeast Asia. Many older theories implicitly
deprecated the navigational abilities and overall cultural creativity of the Pacific
islanders. For example, British anthropologists G. Elliot Smith and W. J. Perry
assumed that only Egyptians would have been skilled enough to navigate and
colonize the Pacific. They inferred that the Egyptians even crossed the Pacific to
found the great civilizations of the New World (North and South America). In
1947 Norwegian adventurer Thor Heyerdahl drifted on a balsa-log raft westward
with the winds and currents across the Pacific from South America to prove his
theory that Pacific islanders were Native Americans (also called American
Indians). Later Heyerdahl suggested that the Pacific was peopled by three
migrations: by Native Americans from the Pacific Northwest of North America
drifting to Hawaii, by Peruvians drifting to Easter Island, and by Melanesians. In
[55]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
1969 he crossed the Atlantic in an Egyptian-style reed boat to prove Egyptian
influences in the Americas. Contrary to these theorists, the overwhelming evidence
of physical anthropology, linguistics, and archaeology shows that the Pacific
islanders came from Southeast Asia and were skilled enough as navigators to sail
against the prevailing winds and currents.
The basic cultural requirements for the successful colonization of the Pacific
islands include the appropriate boat-building, sailing, and navigation skills to get to
the islands in the first place, domesticated plants and gardening skills suited to
often marginal conditions, and a varied inventory of fishing implements and
techniques. It is now generally believed that these prerequisites originated with
peoples speaking Austronesian languages (a group of several hundred related
languages) and began to emerge in Southeast Asia by about 5000 B.C.E. The
culture of that time, based on archaeology and linguistic reconstruction, is assumed
to have had a broad inventory of cultivated plants including taro, yarns, banana,
sugarcane, breadfruit, coconut, sago, and rice. Just as important, the culture also
possessed the basic foundation for an effective maritime adaptation, including
outrigger canoes and a variety of fishing techniques that could be effective for
overseas voyaging.
Contrary to the arguments of some that much of the pacific was settled by
Polynesians accidentally marooned after being lost and adrift, it seems reasonable
that this feat was accomplished by deliberate colonization expeditions that set out
fully stocked with food and domesticated plants and animals. Detailed studies of
the winds and currents using computer simulations suggest that drifting canoes
would have been a most unlikely means of colonizing the Pacific. These
expeditions were likely driven by population growth and political dynamics on the
home islands, as well as the challenge and excitement of exploring unknown
[56]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
waters. Because all Polynesians, Micronesians, and many Melanesians speak
Austronesian languages and grow crops derived from Southeast Asia, all these
peoples most certainly derived from that region and not the New World or
elsewhere. The undisputedpre-Columbian presence in Oceania of the sweet potato,
which is a New World domesticate, has sometimes been used to support
Heyerdahl’s “American Indians in the Pacific” theories. However, this is one plant
out of a long list of Southeast Asian domesticates. As Patrick Kirch, an American
anthropologist, points out, rather than being brought by rafting South Americans,
sweet potatoes might just have easily been brought back by returning Polynesian
navigators who could have reached the west coast of South America.
[57]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The Cambrian Explosion
The geologic timescale is marked by significant geologic and biological events,
including the origin of Earth about 4.6 billion years ago, the origin of life about 3.5
billion years ago, the origin of eukaryotic life-forms (living things that have cells
with true nuclei) about 1.5 billion years ago, and the origin of animals about 0.6
billion years ago. The last event marks the beginning of the Cambrian period.
Animals originated relatively late in the history of Earth—in only the last 10
percent of Earth’s history. During a geologically brief 100-million-year period, all
modern animal groups (along with other animals that are now extinct) evolved.
This rapid origin and diversification of animals is often referred to as “the
Cambrian explosion.”
Scientists have asked important questions about this explosion for more than a
century. Why did it occur so late in the history of Earth? The origin of
multicellular forms of life seems a relatively simple step compared to the origin of
life itself. Why does the fossil record not document the series of evolutionary
changes during the evolution of animals? Why did animal life evolve so quickly?
Paleontologists continue to search the fossil record for answers to these questions.
One interpretation regarding the absence of fossils during this important 100-
million-year period is that early animals were soft bodied and simply did not
fossilize. Fossilization of soft-bodied animals is less likely than fossilization of
hard-bodied animals, but it does occur. Conditions that promote fossilization of
soft-bodied animals include very rapid covering by sediments that create an
environment that discourages decomposition. In fact, fossil beds containing soft-
bodied animals have been known for many years.
[58]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The Ediacara fossil formation, which contains the oldest known animal fossils,
consists exclusively of soft-bodied forms. Although named after a site in Australia,
the Ediacara formation is worldwide in distribution and dates to Precambrian
times. This 700-million-year-old formation gives few clues to the origins of
modern animals, however, because paleontologists believe it represents an
evolutionary experiment that failed. It contains no ancestors of modern animal
groups.
A slightly younger fossil formation containing animal remains is the Tommotian
formation, named after a locale in Russia. It dates to the very early Cambrian
period, and it also contains only soft-bodied forms. At one time, the animals
present in these fossil beds were assigned to various modern animal groups, but
most paleontologists now agree that all Tommotian fossils represent unique body
forms that arose in the early Cambrian period and disappeared before the end of
the period, leaving no descendants in modern animal groups.
A third fossil formation containing both soft-bodied and hard-bodied animals
provides evidence of the result of the Cambrian explosion. This fossil formation,
called the Burgess Shale, is in Yoho National Park in the Canadian Rocky
Mountains of British Columbia. Shortly after the Cambrian explosion, mud slides
rapidly buried thousands of marine animals under conditions that favored
fossilization. These fossil beds provide evidence of about 32 modern animal
groups, plus about 20 other animal body forms that are so different from any
modern animals that they cannot be assigned to any one of the modern groups.
These unassignable animals include a large swimming predator called
Anomalocaris and a soft-bodied animal called Wiwaxia, which ate detritus or
algae. The Burgess Shale formation also has fossils of many extinct representatives
of modern animal groups. For example, a well-known Burgess Shale animal
[59]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
called Sidneyia is a representative of a previously unknown group of arthropods (a
category of animals that includes insects, spiders, mites, and crabs).
Fossil formations like the Burgess Shale show that evolution cannot always be
thought of as a slow progression. The Cambrian explosion involved rapid
evolutionary diversification, followed by the extinction of many unique animals.
Why was this evolution so rapid? No one really knows. Many zoologists believe
that it was because so many ecological niches were available with virtually no
competition from existing species. Will zoologists ever know the evolutionary
sequences in the Cambrian explosion? Perhaps another ancient fossil bed of soft-
bodied animals from 600-million-year-old seas is awaiting discovery.
[60]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 06
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[61]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Powering the Industrial Revolution
In Britain one of the most dramatic changes of the Industrial Revolution was the
harnessing of power. Until the reign of George Ⅲ(1760-1820), available sources of
power for work and travel had not increased since the Middle Ages. There were
three sources of power: animal or human muscles; the wind, operating on sail or
windmill; and running water. Only the last of these was suited at all to the
continuous operating of machines, and although waterpower abounded in
Lancashire and Scotland and ran grain mills as well as textile mills, it had one
great disadvantage: streams flowed where nature intended them to, and water-
driven factories had to be located on their banks whether or not the location was
desirable for other reasons. Furthermore, even the most reliable waterpower varied
with the seasons and disappeared in a drought. The new age of machinery, in short,
could not have been born without a new source of both movable and constant
power.
The source had long been known but not exploited. Early in the eighteenth century,
a pump had come into use in which expanding steam raised a piston in a cylinder,
and atmospheric pressure brought it down again when the steam condensed inside
the cylinder to form a vacuum. This “atmospheric engine,” invented by Thomas
Savery and vastly improved by his partner, Thomas Newcomen, embodied
revolutionary principles, but it was so slow and wasteful of fuel that it could not be
employed outside the coal mines for which it had been designed. In the 1760s,
James Watt perfected a separate condenser for the steam, so that the cylinder did
not have to be cooled at every stroke; then he devised a way to make the piston
turn a wheel and thus convert reciprocating (back and forth) motion into rotary
motion. He thereby transformed an inefficient pump of limited use into a steam
[62]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
engine of a thousand uses. The final step came when steam was introduced into the
cylinder to drive the piston backward as well as forward, thereby increasing the
speed of the engine and cutting its fuel consumption.
Watt's steam engine soon showed what it could do. It liberated industry from
dependence on running water. The engine eliminated water in the mines by driving
efficient pumps, which made possible deeper and deeper mining. The ready
availability of coal inspired William Murdoch during the 1790s to develop the first
new form of nighttime illumination to be discovered in a millennium and a half.
Coal gas rivaled smoky oil lamps and flickering candles, and early in the new
century, well-to-do Londoners grew accustomed to gaslit houses and even streets.
Iron manufacturers, which had starved for fuel while depending on charcoal, also
benefited from ever-increasing supplies of coal: blast furnaces with steam-powered
bellows turned out more iron and steel for the new machinery. Steam became the
motive force of the Industrial Revolution as coal and iron ore were the raw
materials.
By 1800 more than a thousand steam engines were in use in the British Isles, and
Britain retained a virtual monopoly on steam engine production until the 1830s.
Steam power did not merely spin cotton and roll iron; early in the new century, it
also multiplied ten times over the amount of paper that a single worker could
produce in a day. At the same time, operators of the first printing presses run by
steam rather than by hand found it possible to produce a thousand pages in an hour
rather than thirty. Steam also promised to eliminate a transportation problem not
fully solved by either canal boats or turnpikes. Boats could carry heavy weights,
but canals could not cross hilly terrain; turnpikes could cross the hills, but the
roadbeds could not stand up under great weights. These problems needed still
another solution, and the ingredients for it lay close at hand. In some industrial
[63]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
regions, heavily laden wagons, with flanged wheels, were being hauled by horses
along metal rails; and the stationary steam engine was puffing in the factory and
mine. Another generation passed before inventors succeeded in combining these
ingredients, by putting the engine on wheels and the wheels on the rails, so as to
provide a machine to take the place of the horse. Thus the railroad age sprang from
what had already happened in the eighteenth century.
www.ZabanExam.com
[64]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
William Smith
In 1769 in a little town in Oxfordshire, England, a child with the very ordinary
name of William Smith was born into the poor family of a village blacksmith. He
received rudimentary village schooling, but mostly he roamed his uncle's farm
collecting the fossils that were so abundant in the rocks of the Cotswold hills.
When he grew older, William Smith taught himself surveying from books he
bought with his small savings, and at the age of eighteen he was apprenticed to a
surveyor of the local parish. He then proceeded to teach himself geology, and when
he was twenty-four, he went to work for the company that was excavating the
Somerset Coal Canal in the south of England.
This was before the steam locomotive, and canal building was at its height. The
companies building the canals to transport coal needed surveyors to help them find
the coal deposits worth mining as well as to determine the best courses for the
canals. This job gave Smith an opportunity to study the fresh rock outcrops created
by the newly dug canal. He later worked on similar jobs across the length and
breadth of England, all the while studying the newly revealed strata and collecting
all the fossils he could find. Smith used mail coaches to travel as much as 10,000
miles per year. In 1815 he published the first modern geological map, “A Map of
the Strata of England and Wales with a Part of Scotland,” a map
so meticulously researched that it can still be used today.
In 1831 when Smith was finally recognized by the Geological Society of London
as the “father of English geology,” it was not only for his maps but also for
something even more important. Ever since people had begun to catalog the strata
in particular outcrops, there had been the hope that these could somehow be used
to calculate geological time. But as more and more accumulations of strata were
[65]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
cataloged in more and more places, it became clear that the sequences of rocks
sometimes differed from region to region and that no rock type was ever going to
become a reliable time marker throughout the world. Even without the problem of
regional differences, rocks present a difficulty as unique time markers. Quartz is
quartz—a silicon ion surrounded by four oxygen ions—there’s no difference at all
between two-million-year-old Pleistocene quartz and Cambrian quartz created over
500 million years ago.
As he collected fossils from strata throughout England, Smith began to see that the
fossils told a different story from the rocks. Particularly in the younger strata, the
rocks were often so similar that he had trouble distinguishing the strata, but he
never had trouble telling the fossils apart. While rock between two consistent strata
might in one place be shale and in another sandstone, the fossils in that shale or
sandstone were always the same. Some fossils endured through so many millions
of years that they appear in many strata, but others occur only in a few strata, and a
few species had their births and extinctions within one particular stratum. Fossils
are thus identifying markers for particular periods in Earth's history.
Not only could Smith identify rock strata by the fossils they contained, he could
also see a pattern emerging: certain fossils always appear in more ancient
sediments, while others begin to be seen as the strata become more recent. By
following the fossils, Smith was able to put all the strata of England's earth into
relative temporal sequence. About the same time, Georges Cuvier made the same
discovery while studying the rocks around Paris.Soon it was realized that this
principle of faunal (animal) succession was valid not only in England or France
but virtuallyeverywhere. It was actually a principle of floral succession as well,
because plants showed the same transformation through time as did fauna.
Limestone may be found in the Cambrian or—300 million years later—in the
[66]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Jurassic strata, but a trilobite—the ubiquitous marine arthropod that had its birth in
the Cambrian—will never be found in Jurassic strata, nor a dinosaur in the
Cambrian.
[67]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Infantile Amnesia
What do you remember about your life before you were three? Few people can
remember anything that happened to them in their early years. Adults' memories of
the next few years also tend to be scanty. Most people remember only a few
events—usually ones that were meaningful and distinctive, such as being
hospitalized or a sibling’s birth.
How might this inability to recall early experiences be explained? The sheer
passage of time does not account for it; adults have excellent recognition of
pictures of people who attended high school with them 35 years earlier. Another
seemingly plausible explanation—that infants do not form enduring memories at
this point in development—also is incorrect. Children two and a half to three years
old remember experiences that occurred in their first year, and eleven month olds
remember some events a year later. Nor does the hypothesis that infantile amnesia
reflects repression—or holding back—of sexually charged episodes explain
the phenomenon. While such repression may occur, people cannot remember
ordinary events from the infant and toddler periods either.
Three other explanations seem more promising. One involves physiological
changes relevant to memory. Maturation of the frontal lobes of the brain continues
throughout early childhood, and this part of the brain may be critical for
remembering particular episodes in ways that can be retrieved later.
Demonstrations of infants’ and toddlers' long-term memory have involved their
repeating motor activities that they had seen or done earlier, such as reaching in the
dark for objects, putting a bottle in a doll’s mouth, or pulling apart two pieces of a
toy. The brain’s level of physiological maturation may support these types of
memories, but not ones requiring explicit verbal descriptions.
[68]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
A second explanation involves the influence of the social world on children’s
language use. Hearing and telling stories about events may help children store
information in ways that will endure into later childhood and adulthood. Through
hearing stories with a clear beginning, middle, and ending children may learn to
extract the gist of events in ways that they will be able to describe many years
later. Consistent with this view, parents and children increasingly engage in
discussions of past events when children are about three years old. However,
hearing such stories is not sufficient for younger children to form enduring
memories. Telling such stories to two year olds does not seem to produce long-
lasting verbalizable memories.
A third likely explanation for infantile amnesia involves incompatibilities between
the ways in which infants encode information and the ways in which older children
and adults retrieve it. Whether people can remember an event depends critically on
the fit between the way in which they earlier encoded the information and the way
in which they later attempt to retrieve it. The better able the person is to reconstruct
the perspective from which the material was encoded, the more likely that recall
will be successful.
This view is supported by a variety of factors that can create mismatches between
very young children's encoding and older children's and adults' retrieval efforts.
The world looks very different to a person whose head is only two or three feet
above the ground than to one whose head is five or six feet above it. Older children
and adults often try to retrieve the names of things they saw, but infants would not
have encoded the information verbally. General knowledge of categories of events
such as a birthday party or a visit to the doctor's office helps older individuals
encode their experiences, but again, infants and toddlers are unlikely to encode
many experiences within such knowledge structures.
[69]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
These three explanations of infantile amnesia are not mutually exclusive; indeed,
they support each other. Physiological immaturity may be part of why infants and
toddlers do not form extremely enduring memories, even when they hear stories
that promote such remembering in preschoolers. Hearing the stories may lead
preschoolers to encode aspects of events that allow them to form memories they
can access as adults. Conversely, improved encoding of what they hear may help
them better understand and remember stories and thus make the stories more useful
for remembering future events. Thus, all three explanations—physiological
maturation, hearing and producing stories about past events, and improved
encoding of key aspects of events—seem likely to be involved in overcoming
infantile amnesia.
[70]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 07
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[71]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The Geologic History of the Mediterranean
In 1970 geologists Kenneth J. Hsu and William B.F. Ryan were collecting research
data while aboard the oceanographic research vessel Glomar Challenger.
An objective of this particular cruise was to investigate the floor of the
Mediterranean and to resolve questions about its geologic history. One question
was related to evidence that the invertebrate fauna (animals without spines) of the
Mediterranean had changed abruptly about 6 million years ago. Most of the older
organisms were nearly wiped out, although a few hardy species survived. A few
managed to migrate into the Atlantic. Somewhat later, the migrants returned,
bringing new species with them. Why did the near extinction and migrations
occur?
Another task for the Glomar Challenger’s scientists was to try to determine the
origin of the domelike masses buried deep beneath the Mediterranean
seafloor. These structures had been detected years earlier by echo-sounding
instruments, but they had never been penetrated in the course of drilling. Were they
salt domes such as are common along the United States Gulf Coast, and if so, why
should there have been so much solid crystalline salt beneath the floor of the
Mediterranean?
With question such as these clearly before them, the scientists aboard the Glomar
Challenger processed to the Mediterranean to search for the answers. On August
23, 1970, they recovered a sample. The sample consisted of pebbles of hardened
sediment that had once been soft, deep-sea mud, as well as granules of gypsum and
fragments of volcanic rock. Not a single pebble was found that might have
indicated that the pebbles came from the nearby continent. In the days following,
samples of solid gypsum were repeatedly brought on deck as drilling operations
[72]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
penetrated the seafloor. Furthermore, the gypsum was found to possess
peculiarities of composition and structure that suggested it had formed on desert
flats. Sediment above and below the gypsum layer contained tiny marine fossils,
indicating open-ocean conditions. As they drilled into the central and deepest part
of the Mediterranean basin, the scientists took solid, shiny, crystalline salt from the
core barrel. Interbedded with the salt were thin layers of what appeared to be
windblown silt.
The time had come to formulate a hypothesis. The investigators theorized that
about 20 million years ago, the Mediterranean was a broad seaway linked to the
Atlantic by two narrow straits. Crustal movements closed the straits, and the
landlocked Mediterranean began to evaporate. Increasing salinity caused by the
evaporation resulted in the extermination of scores of invertebrate species. Only a
few organisms especially tolerant of very salty conditions remained. As
evaporation continued, the remaining brine (salt water) became so dense that the
calcium sulfate of the hard layer was precipitated. In the central deeper part of the
basin, the last of the brine evaporated to precipitate more soluble sodium chloride
(salt). Later, under the weight of overlying sediments, this salt flowed plastically
upward to form salt domes. Before this happened, however, the Mediterranean was
a vast desert 3,000 meters deep. Then, about 5.5 million years ago came the
deluge. As a result of crustal adjustments and faulting, the Strait of Gibraltar,
where the Mediterranean now connects to the Atlantic, opened, and water cascaded
spectacularly back into the Mediterranean. Turbulent waters tore into the hardened
salt flats, broke them up, and ground them into the pebbles observed in the first
sample taken by the Challenger. As the basin was refilled, normal marine
organisms returned. Soon layer of oceanic ooze began to accumulate above the old
[73]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
hard layer.The salt and gypsum, the faunal changes, and the unusual gravel
provided abundant evidence that the Mediterranean was once a desert.
www.ZabanExam.com
[74]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Ancient Rome and Greece
There is a quality of cohesiveness about the Roman world that applied neither to
Greece nor perhaps to any other civilization, ancient or modern. Like the stone of
Roman wall, which were held together both by the regularity of the design and by
that peculiarly powerful Roman cement, so the various parts of the Roman realm
were bonded into a massive, monolithic entity by physical, organizational, and
psychological controls. The physical bonds included the network of military
garrisons, which were stationed in every province, and the network of stone-built
roads that linked the provinces with Rome. The organizational bonds were based
on the common principles of law and administration and on the universal army of
officials who enforced common standards of conduct. The psychological controls
were built on fear and punishment—on the absolute certainty that anyone or
anything that threatened the authority of Rome would be utterly destroyed.
The source of Roman obsession with unity and cohesion may well have lain in the
pattern of Rome’s early development. Whereas Greece had grown from scores of
scattered cities, Rome grew from one single organism. While the Greek world had
expanded along the Mediterranean seas lanes, the Roman world was assembled by
territorial conquest. Of course, the contrast is not quite so stark: in Alexander the
Great the Greeks had found the greatest territorial conqueror of all time; and the
Romans, once they moved outside Italy, did not fail to learn the lessons of sea
power. Yet the essential difference is undeniable. The key to the Greek world lay
in its high-powered ships; the key to Roman power lay in its marching legions. The
Greeks were wedded to the sea; the Romans, to the land. The Greek was a sailor at
heart; the Roman, a landsman.
[75]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Certainly, in trying to explain the Roman phenomenon, one would have to place
great emphasis on this almost instinct for the territorial imperative. Roman
priorities lay in the organization, exploitation, and defense of their territory. In all
probability it was the fertile plain of Latium, where the Latins who founded Rome
originated, that created the habits and skills of landed settlement, landed property,
landed economy, landed administration, and a land-based society. From this arose
the Roman genius for military organization and orderly government. In turn, a
deep attachment to the land, and to the stability which rural life
engenders, fostered the Roman virtues: gravitas, a sense of responsibility, pietas, a
sense of devotion to family and country, and iustitia, a sense of the natural order.
Modern attitudes to Roman civilization range from the infinitely impressed to the
thoroughly disgusted. As always, there are the power worshippers, especially
among historians, who are predisposed to admire whatever is strong, who feel
more attracted to the might of Rome than to the subtlety of Greece. At the same
time, there is a solid body of opinion that dislikes Rome. For many, Rome is at best
the imitator and the continuator of Greece on a larger scale. Greek civilization had
quality; Rome, mere quantity. Greece was original; Rome, derivative. Greece had
style; Rome had money. Greece was the inventor; Rome, the research and
development division. Such indeed was the opinion of some of the more
intellectual Romans. “Had the Greeks held novelty in such disdain as we,” asked
Horace in his epistle, “what work of ancient date would now exist?”
Rome’s debt to Greece was enormous. The Romans adopted Greek religion and
moral philosophy. In literature, Greek writers were consciously used as models by
their Latin successors. It was absolutely accepted that an educated Roman should
be fluent in Greek. In speculative philosophy and the sciences, the Romans made
virtually no advance on early achievements.
[76]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Yet it would be wrong to suggest that Rome was somehow a junior partner in
Greco-Roman civilization. The Roman genius was projected into new spheres—
especially into those of law, military organization, administration, and engineering.
Moreover, the tensions that arose within the Roman state produced literary and
artistic sensibilities of the highest order. It was no accident that many leading
Roman soldiers and statesmen were writers of high caliber.
[77]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Agriculture, Iron, and the Bantu Peoples
There is evidence of agriculture in Africa prior to 3000 B.C. It may have
developed independently, but many scholars believe that the spread of agriculture
and iron throughout Africa linked it to the major centers of the Near East and
Mediterranean world. The drying up of what is now the Sahara desert had pushed
many peoples to the south into sub-Sahara Africa. These peoples settled at first in
scattered hunting-and-gathering bands, although in some places near lakes and
rivers, people who fished, with a more secure food supply, lived in larger
population concentrations. Agriculture seems to have reached these people from
the Near East, since the first domesticated crops were millets and sorghums whose
origins are not African but west Asian. Once the idea of planting diffused, Africans
began to develop their own crops, such as certain varieties of rice, and they
demonstrated a continued receptiveness to new imports. The proposed areas of the
domestication of African crops lie in a band that extends from Ethiopia across
southern Sudan to West Africa. Subsequently, other crops, such as bananas, were
introduced from Southeast Asia.
Livestock also came from outside Africa. Cattle were introduced from Asia, as
probably were domestic sheep and goats. Horses were apparently introduced by the
Hyksos invaders of Egypt (1780-1560 B.C.) and then spread across the Sudan to
West Africa. Rock paintings in the Sahara indicate that horses and chariots were
used to traverse the desert and that by 300-200 B.C., there were trade routes across
the Sahara. Horses were adopted by peoples of the West African savannah, and
later their powerful cavalry forces allowed them to carve out large empires.
Finally, the camel was introduced around the first century A.D. This was an
important innovation, because the camel’s abilities to thrive in harsh desert
[78]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
conditions and to carry large loads cheaply made it an effective and efficient means
of transportation. The camel transformed the desert from a barrier into a still
difficult, but more accessible, route of trade and communication.
Iron came from West Asia, although its routes of diffusion were somewhat
different than those of agriculture. Most of Africa presents a curious case in which
societies moved directly from a technology of stone to iron without passing
through the intermediate stage of copper or bronze metallurgy, although some
early copper-working sites have been found in West Africa. Knowledge of iron
making penetrated into the forest and savannahs of West Africa at roughly the
same time that iron making was reaching Europe. Evidence of iron making has
been found in Nigeria, Ghana, and Mali.
This technological shift cause profound changes in the complexity of African
societies. Iron represented power. In West Africa the blacksmith who made tools
and weapons had an important place in society, often with special religious powers
and functions. Iron hoes, which made the land more productive, and iron weapons,
which made the warrior more powerful, had symbolic meaning in a number of
West Africa societies. Those who knew the secrets of making iron
gained ritual and sometimes political power.
Unlike in the Americas, where metallurgy was a very late and limited
development, Africans had iron from a relatively early date, developing ingenious
furnaces to produce the high heat needed for production and to control the amount
of air that reached the carbon and iron ore necessary for making iron. Much of
Africa moved right into the Iron Age, taking the basic technology and adapting it
to local conditions and resources.
[79]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The diffusion of agriculture and later of iron was accompanied by a great
movement of people who may have carried these innovations. These people
probably originated in eastern Nigeria. Their migration may have been set in
motion by an increase in population caused by a movement of peoples fleeing the
desiccation, or drying up, of the Sahara. They spoke a language, proto-Bantu
(“Bantu” means “the people”), which is the parent tongue of a language of a large
number of Bantu languages still spoken throughout sub-Sahara Africa. Why and
how these people spread out into central and southern Africa remains a mystery,
but archaeologists believe that their iron weapons allowed them to conquer their
hunting-gathering opponents, who still used stone implements. Still, the process is
uncertain, and peaceful migration—or simply rapid demographic growth—may
have also caused the Bantu explosion.
[80]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 08
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[81]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The Rise of Teotihuacán
The city of Teotihuacán, which lay about 50 kilometers northeast of modern-day
Mexico City, began its growth by 200-100 B.C. At its height, between about A.D.
150 and 700, it probably had a population of more than 125,000 people and
covered at least 20 square kilometers. It had over 2,000 apartment complexes, a
great market, a large number of industrial workshops, an administrative center, a
number of massivereligious edifices, and a regular grid pattern of streets and
buildings. Clearly, much planning and central control were involved in the
expansion and ordering of this great metropolis. Moreover, the city had economic
and perhaps religious contacts with most parts of Mesoamerica (modern Central
America and Mexico).
How did this tremendous development take place, and why did it happen in the
Teotihuacán Valley? Among the main factors are Teotihuacán’s geographic
location on a natural trade route to the south and east of the Valley of Mexico, the
obsidian resources in the Teotihuacán Valley itself, and the valley’s potential for
extensive irrigation. The exact role of other factors is much more difficult
to pinpoint―for instance, Teotihuacán’s religious significance as a shrine, the
historical situation in and around the Valley of Mexico toward the end of the first
millennium B.C., the ingenuity and foresightedness of Teotihuacán’s elite, and,
finally, the impact of natural disasters, such as the volcanic eruptions of the late
first millennium B.C.
This last factor is at least circumstantially implicated in Teotihuacán’s rise. Prior to
200 B.C., a number of relatively small centers coexisted in and near the Valley of
Mexico. Around this time, the largest of these centers, Cuicuilco, was seriously
affected by a volcanic eruption, with much of its agricultural land covered by lava.
[82]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
With Cuicuilco eliminated as a potential rival, any one of a number of relatively
modest towns might have emerged as a leading economic and political power in
Central Mexico. The archaeological evidence clearly indicates, though, that
Teotihuacán was the center that did arise as the predominant force in the area by
the first century A.D.
It seems likely that Teotihuacán’s natural resources, along with the city elite’s
ability to recognize their potential, gave the city a competitive edge over its
neighbors. The valley, like many other places in Mexican and Guatemalan
highlands, was rich in obsidian. The hard volcanic stone was a resource that had
been in great demand for many years, at least since the rise of the Olmecs (a people
who flourished between 1200 and 400 B.C.), and it apparently had a secure market.
Moreover, recent research on obsidian tools found at Olmec sites has shown that
some of the obsidian obtained by the Olmecs originated near Teotihuacán.
Teotihuacán obsidian must have been recognized as a valuable commodity for
many centuries before the great city arose.
Long-distance trade in obsidian probably gave the elite residents of Teotihuacán
access to a wide variety of exotic good, as well as a relatively prosperous life. Such
success may have attracted immigrants to Teotihuacán. In addition, Teotihuacán’s
elite may have consciously attempted to attract new inhabitants. It is also probable
that as early as 200 B.C.Teotihuacán may have achieved some religious
significance and its shrine (or shrines) may have served as an additional population
magnet. Finally, the growing population was probably fed by increasing the
number and size of irrigated fields.
The picture of Teotihuacán that emerges is a classic picture of positive feedback
among obsidian mining and working, trade, population growth, irrigation, and
religious tourism. The thriving obsidian operation, for example, would necessitate
[83]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
more miners, additional manufacturers of obsidian tools, and additional traders to
carry the goods to new markets. All this led to increased wealth, which in turn
would attract more immigrants to Teotihuacán. The growing power of the elite,
who controlled the economy, would give them the means to physically coerce
people to move to Teotihuacán and serve as additions to the labor force. More
irrigation works would have to be built to feed the growing population, and this
resulted in more power and wealth for the elite.
www.ZabanExam.com
[84]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Extinction of the Dinosaurs
Paleontologists have argued for a long time that the demise of the dinosaurs was
caused by climatic alterations associated with slow changes in the positions of
continents and seas resulting from plate tectonics. Off and on throughout the
Cretaceous (the last period of the Mesozoic era, during which dinosaurs
flourished), large shallow seas covered extensive areas of the continents. Data from
diverse sources, including geochemical evidence preserved in seafloor sediments,
indicate that the Late Cretaceous climate was milder than today’s. The days were
not too hot, nor the nights too cold. The summers were not too warm, nor the
winters too frigid. The shallow seas on the continents probably buffered the
temperature of the nearby air, keeping it relatively constant.
At the end of the Cretaceous, the geological record shows that these seaways
retreated from the continents back into the major ocean basins. No one knows why.
Over a period of about 100,000 years, while the seas pulled back, climates around
the world became dramatically more extreme: warmer days, cooler nights; hotter
summers, colder winters. Perhaps dinosaurs could not tolerate these extreme
temperature changes and became extinct.
If true, though, why did cold-blooded animals such as snakes, lizards, turtles, and
crocodiles survive the freezing winters and torrid summers? These animals are at
the mercy of the climate to maintain a livable body temperature. It’s hard to
understand why they would not be affected, whereas dinosaurs were left too
crippled to cope, especially if, as some scientists believe, dinosaurs were warm-
blooded. Critics also point out that the shallow seaways had retreated from and
advanced on the continents numerous times during the Mesozoic, so why did the
dinosaurs survive the climatic changes associated with the earlier fluctuations but
[85]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
not with this one? Although initially appealing, the hypothesis of a simple climatic
change related to sea levels is insufficient to explain all the data.
Dissatisfaction with conventional explanations for dinosaur extinctions led to a
surprising observation that, in turn, has suggested a new hypothesis. Many plants
and animals disappear abruptly from the fossil record as one moves from layers of
rock documenting the end of the Cretaceous up into rocks representing the
beginning of the Cenozoic (the era after the Mesozoic). Between the last layer of
Cretaceous rock and the first layer of Cenozoic rock, there is often a thin layer of
clay. Scientists felt that they could get an idea of how long the extinctions took by
determining how long it took to deposit this one centimeter of clay and they
thought they could determine the time it took to deposit the clay by determining
the amount of the element iridium (Ir) it contained.
Ir has not been common at Earth’s since the very beginning of the planet’s history.
Because it usually exists in a metallic state, it was preferentially incorporated in
Earth’s core as the planet cooled and consolidated. Ir is found in high
concentrations in some meteorites, in which the solar system’s original chemical
composition is preserved. Even today, microscopic meteorites
continually bombard Earth, falling on both land and sea. By measuring how many
of these meteorites fall to Earth over a given period of time, scientists can estimate
how long it might have taken to deposit the observed amount of Ir in the boundary
clay. These calculations suggest that a period of about one million years would
have been required.However, other reliable evidence suggests that the deposition
of the boundary clay could not have taken one million years. So the unusually high
concentration of Ir seems to require a special explanation.
In view of these facts, scientists hypothesized that a single large asteroid, about 10
to 15 kilometers across, collided with Earth, and the resulting fallout created the
[86]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
boundary clay. Their calculations show that the impact kicked up a dust cloud that
cut off sunlight for several months, inhibiting photosynthesis in plants; decreased
surface temperatures on continents to below freezing; caused extreme episodes of
acid rain; and significantly raised long-term global temperatures through the
greenhouse effect. This disruption of food chain and climate would have eradicated
the dinosaurs and other organisms in less than fifty years.
[87]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Running Water on Mars
Photographic evidence suggests that liquid water once existed in great quantity on
the surface of Mars. Two types of flow features are seen: runoff channels and
outflow channels. Runoff channels are found in the southern highlands. These flow
features are extensive systems—sometimes hundreds of kilometers in total
length—of interconnecting, twisting channels that seem to merge into larger, wider
channels. They bear a strong resemblance to river systems on Earth, and geologists
think that they are dried-up beds of long-gone rivers that once carried rainfall on
Mars from the mountains down into the valleys. Runoff channels on Mars speak of
a time 4 billion years ago (the age of the Martian highlands), when the atmosphere
was thicker, the surface warmer, and liquid water widespread.
Outflow channels are probably relics of catastrophic flooding on Mars long
ago. They appear only in equatorial regions and generally do not form extensive
interconnected networks. Instead, they are probably the paths taken by huge
volumes of water draining from the southern highlands into the northern
plains. The onrushing water arising from these flash floods likely also formed the
odd teardrop-shaped “islands” (resembling the miniature versions seen in the wet
sand of our beaches at low tide) that have been found on the plains close to the
ends of the outflow channels. Judging from the width and depth of the channels,
the flow rates must have been truly enormous—perhaps as much as a hundred
times greater than the 105 tons per second carried by the great Amazon river.
Flooding shaped the outflow channels approximately 3 billion years ago, about the
same times as the northern volcanic plains formed.
Some scientists speculate that Mars may have enjoyed an extended early Period
during which rivers, lakes, and perhaps even oceans adorned its surface. A 2003
[88]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Mars Global Surveyor image shows what mission specialists think may be a
delta—a fan-shaped network of channels and sediments where a river once flowed
into a larger body of water, in this case a lake filling a crater in the southern
highlands. Other researchers go even further, suggesting that the data provide
evidence for large open expenses of water on the early Martian surface. A
computer-generated view of the Martian north polar region shows the extent of
what may have been an ancient ocean covering much of the northern lowlands.
The Hellas Basin, which measures some 3,000 kilometers across and has a floor
that lies nearly 9 kilometers below the basin’s rim, is another candidate for an
ancient Martian sea.
These ideas remain controversial. Proponents point to features such as the terraced
“beaches” shown in one image, which could conceivably have been left behind as
a lake or ocean evaporated and the shoreline receded. But detractors maintain that
the terraces could also have been created by geological activity, perhaps related to
the geologic forces that depressed the Northern Hemisphere far below the level of
the south, in which case they have nothing whatever to do with Martian water.
Furthermore, Mars Global Surveyor data released in 2003 seem to indicate that the
Martian surface contains too few carbonate rock layers—layers containing
compounds of carbon and oxygen—that should have been formed in abundance in
an ancient ocean. Their absence supports the picture of a cold, dry Mars that never
experienced the extended mild period required to form lakes and oceans. However,
more recent data imply that at least some parts of the planet did in fact experience
long periods in the past during which liquid water existed on the surface.
Aside from some small-scale gullies (channels) found since 2000, which are
inconclusive, astronomers have no direct evidence for liquid water anywhere on
the surface of Mars today, and the amount of water vapor in the Martian
[89]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
atmosphere is tiny. Yet even setting aside the unproven hints of ancient oceans, the
extent of the outflow channels suggests that a huge total volume of water existed
on Mars in the past. Where did all the water go? The answer may be that virtually
all the water on Mars is now locked in the permafrost layer under the surface, with
more contained in the planet’s polar caps.
[90]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 09
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[91]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Colonizing the Americas via the Northwest
Coast
It has long been accepted that the Americas were colonized by a migration of
peoples from Asia, slowly traveling across a land bridge called Beringia (now the
Bering Strait between northeastern Asia and Alaska) during the last Ice Age. The
first water craft theory about the migration was that around 11,000-12,000 years
ago there was an ice-free corridor stretching from eastern Beringia to the areas of
North America south of the great northern glaciers. It was the midcontinental
corridor between two massive ice sheets-the Laurentide to the west-that enabled
the southward migration. But belief in this ice-free corridor began to crumble when
paleoecologist Glen MacDonald demonstrated that some of the most important
radiocarbon dates used to support the existence of an ice-free corridor were
incorrect. He persuasively argued that such an ice-free corridor did not exist until
much later, when the continental ice began its final retreat.
Support is growing for the alternative theory that people using watercraft, possibly
skin boats, moved southward from Beringia along the Gulf of Alaska and then
southward along the Northwest coast of North America possibly as early as 16,000
years ago. This route would have enabled humans to enter southern areas of the
Americas prior to the melting of the continental glaciers. Until the early
1970s,most archaeologists did not consider the coast a possible migration route
into the Americas because geologists originally believed that during the last Ice
Age the entire Northwest Coast was covered by glacial ice. It had been assumed
that the ice extended westward from the Alaskan/Canadian mountains to the very
edge of the continental shelf, the flat, submerged part of the continent that extends
[92]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
into the ocean. This would have created a barrier of ice extending from the Alaska
Peninsula, through the Gulf of Alaska and southward along the Northwest Coast of
north America to what is today the state of Washington.
The most influential proponent of the coastal migration route has been Canadian
archaeologist Knut Fladmark. He theorized that with the use of watercraft, people
gradually colonized unglaciated refuges and areas along the continental shelf
exposed by the lower sea level. Fladmark’s hypothesis received additional support
from the fact that the greatest diversity in native American languages occurs along
the west coast of the Americas, suggesting that this region has been settled the
longest.
More recent geologic studies documented deglaciation and the existence of ice-free
areas throughout major coastal areas of British Columbia, Canada, by 13,000 years
ago. Research now indicates that sizable areas of southeastern Alaska along the
inner continental shelf were not covered by ice toward the end of the last Ice Age.
One study suggests that except for a 250-mile coastal area between southwestern
British Columbia and Washington State, the Northwest Coast of North America
was largely free of ice by approximately 16,000 years ago. Vastareas along the
coast may have been deglaciated beginning around 16,000 years ago, possibly
providing a coastal corridor for the movement of plants, animals, and humans
sometime between 13,000 and 14,000 years ago.
The coastal hypothesis has gained increasing support in recent years because the
remains of large land animals, such as caribou and brown bears, have been found
in southeastern Alaska dating between 10,000 and 12,500 years ago. This is the
time period in which most scientists formerly believed the area to
be inhospitable for humans. It has been suggested that if the environment were
capable of supporting breeding populations of bears, there would have been
[93]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
enough food resources to support humans. Fladmark and other believe that the first
human colonization of America occurred by boat along the Northwest Coast during
the very late Ice Age, possibly as early as 14,000 years ago. The most recent
geologic evidence indicates that it may have been possible for people to colonize
ice-free regions along the continental shelf that were still exposed by the lower sea
level between13,000 and 14,000 years ago.
The coastal hypothesis suggests an economy based on marine mammal hunting,
saltwater fishing gathering, and the use of watercraft. Because of the barrier of ice
to the east, the Pacific Ocean to the west, and populated areas to the north, there
may have been a greater impetus for people to move in a southerly direction.
www.ZabanExam.com
[94]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Reflection in Teaching
Teachers, it is thought, benefit from the practice of reflection, the conscious act of
thinking deeply about and carefully examining the interactions and events within
their own classrooms. Educators T. Wildman and J. Niles (1987) describe a
scheme for developing reflective practice in experienced teachers. This
was justified by the view that reflective practice could help teachers to feel more
intellectually involved in their role and work in teaching and enable them to cope
with the paucity of scientific fact and the uncertainty of knowledge in the
discipline of teaching.
Wildman and Niles were particularly interested in investigating the conditions
under which reflection might flourish–a subject on which there is little guidance in
the literature. They designed an experimental strategy for a group of teachers in
Virginia and worked with 40 practicing teachers over several years. They were
concerned that many would be “drawn to these new, refreshing” conceptions of
teaching only to find that the void between the abstractions and the realities of
teacher reflection is too great to bridge. Reflection on a complex task such as
teaching is not easy. The teachers were taken through a program of talking about
teaching events, moving on to reflecting about specific issues in a supported, and
later an independent, manner.
Wildman and Niles observed that systematic reflection on teaching required a
sound ability to understand classroom events in an objectivemanner. They describe
the initial understanding in the teachers with whom they were working as being
“utilitarian … and not rich or detailed enough to drive systematic reflection.”
Teachers rarely have the time or opportunities to view their own or the teaching of
others in an objective manner. Further observation revealed the tendency of
[95]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
teachers to evaluate events rather than review the contributory factors in a
considered manner by, in effect, standing outside the situation.
Helping this group of teachers to revise their thinking about classroom events
became central. This process took time and patience and effective trainers. The
researchers estimate that the initial training of the teachers to view events
objectively took between 20 and 30 hours, with the same number of hours again
being required to practice the skills of reflection.
Wildman and Niles identify three principles that facilitate reflective practice in a
teaching situation. The first is support from administrators in an education system,
enabling teachers to understand the requirements of reflective practice and how it
relates to teaching students. The second is the availability of sufficient time and
space. The teachers in the program described how they found it difficult to put
aside the immediate demands of others in order to give themselves the time they
needed to develop their reflective skills. The third is the development of a
collaborative environment with support from other teachers. Support and
encouragement were also required to help teachers in the program cope with
aspects of their professional life with which they were not comfortable. Wildman
and Niles make a summary comment: “Perhaps the most important thing we
learned is the idea of the teacher-as-reflective-practitioner will not happen simply
because it is a good or even compelling idea.”
The work of Wildman and Niles suggests the importance of recognizing some of
the difficulties of instituting reflective practice. Others have noted this, making a
similar point about the teaching profession’s cultural inhibitions about reflective
practice. Zeichner and Liston (1987) point out the inconsistency between the role
of the teacher as a (reflective) professional decision maker and the more usual role
of the teacher as a technician, putting into practice the ideas of theirs. More basic
[96]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
than the cultural issues is the matter of motivation. Becoming a reflective
practitioner requires extra work (Jaworski, 1993) and has only vaguely defined
goals with, perhaps, little initially perceivable reward and the threat of
vulnerability. Few have directly questioned what might lead a teacher to want to
become reflective. Apparently, the most obvious reason for teachers to work
toward reflective practice is that teacher educators think it is a good thing. There
appear to be many unexplored matters about the motivation to reflect – for
example, the value of externally motivated reflection as opposed to that of teachers
who might reflect by habit.
[97]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
The Arrival of Plant Life in Hawaii
When the Hawaiian Islands emerged from the sea as volcanoes, starting about five
million years ago, they were far removed from other landmasses. Then, as blazing
sunshine alternated with drenching rains, the harsh, barren surfaces of the black
rocks slowly began to soften. Winds brought a variety of life-forms.
Spores light enough to float on the breezes were carried thousands of miles from
more ancient lands and deposited at random across the bare mountain flanks. A
few of these spores found a toehold on the dark, forbidding rocks and grew and
began to work their transformation upon the land. Lichens were probably the first
successful flora. These are not single individual plants; each one is a symbiotic
combination of an alga and a fungus. The algae capture the sun's energy by
photosynthesis and store it in organic molecules. The fungi absorb moisture and
mineral salts from the rocks, passing these on in waste products that nourish
algae. It is significant that the earliest living thing that built communities on these
islands are examples of symbiosis, a phenomenon that depends upon the close
cooperation of two or more forms of life and a principle that is very important in
island communities.
Lichens helped to speed the decomposition of the hard rock surfaces, preparing a
soft bed of soil that was abundantly supplied with minerals that had been carried in
the molten rock from the bowels of Earth. Now, other forms of life could take
hold: ferns and mosses (two of the most ancient types of land plants) that flourish
even in rock crevices. These plants propagate by producing spores–tiny fertilized
cells that contain all the instructions for making a new plant–but the spore are
unprotected by any outer coating and carry no supply of nutrient. Vast numbers of
them fall on the ground beneath the mother plants. Sometimes they are carried
[98]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
farther afield by water or by wind. But only those few spores that settle down in
very favorable locations can start new life; the vast majority fall on barren ground.
By force of sheer numbers, however, the mosses and ferns reached Hawaii,
survived, and multiplied. Some species developed great size, becoming tree ferns
that even now grow in the Hawaiian forests.
Many millions of years after ferns evolved (but long before the Hawaiian Islands
were born from the sea), another kind of flora evolved on Earth: the seed-bearing
plants. This was a wonderful biological invention. The seed has an outer coating
that surrounds the genetic material of the new plant, and inside this covering is a
concentrated supply of nutrients. Thus the seed’s chances of survival are greatly
enhanced over those of the naked spore. One type of seed-bearing plant, the
angiosperm, includes all forms of blooming vegetation. In the angiosperm the
seeds are wrapped in an additional layer of covering. Some of these coats are hard–
like the shell of a nut–for extra protection. Some are soft and tempting, like a peach
or a cherry. In some angiosperms the seeds are equipped with gossamer wings, like
the dandelion and milkweed seeds. These new characteristics offered better ways
for the seed to move to new habitats. They could travel through the air, float in
water, and lie dormant for many months.
Plants with large, buoyant seeds—like coconuts—drift on ocean currents and are
washed up on the shores. Remarkably resistant to the vicissitudes of ocean travel,
they can survive prolonged immersion in saltwater when they come to rest on
warm beaches and the conditions are favorable, the seed coats soften. Nourished
by their imported supply of nutrients, the young plants push out their roots and
establish their place in the sun.
By means of these seeds, plants spread more widely to new locations, even to
isolated islands like the Hawaiian archipelago, which lies more than 2,000 miles
[99]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
west of California and 3,500 miles east of Japan. The seeds of grasses, flowers, and
blooming trees made the long trips to these islands. (Grasses are simple forms of
angiosperms that bear their encapsulated seeds on long stalks.) In a surprisingly
short time, angiosperms filled many of the land areas on Hawaii that had been
bare.
www.ZabanExam.com
[100]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
TPO 10
Reading Passages
www.ZabanExam.com
[101]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Chinese Pottery
China has one of the world's oldest continuous civilizations—despite invasions and
occasional foreign rule. A country as vast as China with so long-lasting a
civilization has a complex social and visual history, within which pottery and
porcelain play a major role.
The function and status of ceramics in China varied from dynasty to dynasty, so
they may be utilitarian, burial, trade-collectors', or even ritual objects, according to
their quality and the era in which they were made. The ceramics fall into three
broad types—earthenware, stoneware, and porcelain—for vessels, architectural
items such as roof tiles, and modeled objects and figures. In addition, there was an
important group of sculptures made for religious use, the majority of which were
produced in earthenware.
The earliest ceramics were fired to earthenware temperatures, but as early as the
fifteenth century B.C., high-temperature stonewares were being made with glazed
surfaces. During the Six Dynasties period (AD 265-589), kilns in north China were
producing high-fired ceramics of good quality. Whitewares produced in Hebei and
Henan provinces from the seventh to the tenth centuries evolved into the highly
prized porcelains of the Song dynasty (AD. 960-1279), long regarded as one of the
high points in the history of China's ceramic industry. The tradition of religious
sculpture extends over most historical periods but is less clearly delineated than
that of stonewares or porcelains, for it embraces the old custom of earthenware
burial ceramics with later religious images and architectural ornament. Ceramic
products also include lead-glazed tomb models of the Han dynasty, three-color
lead-glazed vessels and figures of the Tang dynasty, and Ming three-color temple
ornaments, in which the motifs were outlined in a raised trail of slip—as well as
[102]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
the many burial ceramics produced in imitation of vessels made in materials of
higher intrinsic value.
Trade between the West and the settled and prosperous Chinese dynasties
introduced new forms and different technologies. One of the most far-reaching
examples is the impact of the fine ninth-century AD. Chinese porcelain wares
imported into the Arab world. So admired were these pieces that they encouraged
the development of earthenware made in imitation of porcelain
and instigated research into the method of their manufacture. From the Middle East
the Chinese acquired a blue pigment—a purified form of cobalt oxide unobtainable
at that time in China—that contained only a low level of manganese. Cobalt ores
found in China have a high manganese content, which produces a more muted
blue-gray color. In the seventeenth century, the trading activities of the Dutch East
India Company resulted in vast quantities of decorated Chinese porcelain being
brought to Europe, which stimulated and influenced the work of a wide variety of
wares, notably Delft. The Chinese themselves adapted many specific vessel forms
from the West, such as bottles with long spouts, and designed a range of decorative
patterns especially for the European market.
Just as painted designs on Greek pots may seem today to be purely
decorative, whereas in fact they were carefully and precisely worked out so that at
the time, their meaning was clear, so it is with Chinese pots. To twentieth-century
eyes, Chinese pottery may appear merely decorative, yet to the Chinese the form of
each object and its adornment had meaning and significance. The dragon
represented the emperor, and the phoenix, the empress; the pomegranate indicated
fertility, and a pair of fish, happiness; mandarin ducks stood for wedded bliss; the
pine tree, peach, and crane are emblems of long life; and fish leaping from waves
indicated success in the civil service examinations. Only when European
[103]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
decorative themes were introduced did these meanings become obscured or even
lost.
From early times pots were used in both religious and secular contexts. The
imperial court commissioned work and in the Yuan dynasty (A.D. 1279-1368) an
imperial ceramic factory was established at Jingdezhen. Pots played an important
part in some religious ceremonies. Long and often lyrical descriptions of the
different types of ware exist that assist in classifying pots, although these
sometimes confuse an already large and complicated picture.
www.ZabanExam.com
[104]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Variations in the Climate
One of the most difficult aspects of deciding whether current climatic events reveal
evidence of the impact of human activities is that it is hard to get a measure of
what constitutes the natural variability of the climate. We know that over the past
millennia the climate has undergone major changes without any significant human
intervention. We also know that the global climate system is immensely
complicated and that everything is in some way connected, and so the system is
capable of fluctuating in unexpected ways. We need therefore to know how much
the climate can vary of its own accord in order to interpret with confidence the
extent to which recent changes are natural as opposed to being the result of human
activities.
Instrumental records do not go back far enough to provide us with reliable
measurements of global climatic variability on timescales longer than a century.
What we do know is that as we include longer time intervals, the record shows
increasing evidence of slow swings in climate between different regimes. To build
up a better picture of fluctuations appreciably further back in time requires us to
use proxy records.
Over long periods of time, substances whose physical and chemical properties
change with the ambient climate at the time can be deposited in a systematic way
to provide a continuous record of changes in those properties overtime, sometimes
for hundreds or thousands of years.Generally, the layering occurs on an annual
basis, hence the observed changes in the records can be dated. Information on
temperature, rainfall, and other aspects of the climate that can be inferred from the
systematic changes in properties is usually referred to as proxy data. Proxy
temperature records have been reconstructed from ice core drilled out of the central
[105]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Greenland ice cap, calcite shells embedded in layered lake sediments in Western
Europe, ocean floor sediment cores from the tropical Atlantic Ocean, ice cores
from Peruvian glaciers, and ice cores from eastern Antarctica. While these records
provide broadly consistent indications that temperature variations can occur on a
global scale, there are nonetheless some intriguing differences, which suggest that
the pattern of temperature variations in regional climates can also differ
significantly from each other.
What the proxy records make abundantly clear is that there have been significant
natural changes in the climate over timescales longer than a few thousand years.
Equally striking, however, is the relative stability of the climate in the past 10.000
years (the Holocene period).
To the extent that the coverage of the global climate from these records can
provide a measure of its true variability, it should at least indicate how all the
natural causes of climate change have combined. These include the chaotic
fluctuations of the atmosphere, the slower but equally erratic behavior of the
oceans, changes in the land surfaces, and the extent of ice and snow. Also included
will be any variations that have arisen from volcanic activity, solar activity, and,
possibly, human activities.
One way to estimate how all the various processes leading to climate variability
will combine is by using computer models of the global climate. They can do only
so much to represent the full complexity of the global climate and hence may give
only limited information about natural variability. Studies suggest that to date the
variability in computer simulations is considerably smaller than in data obtained
from the proxy records.
[106]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
In addition to the internal variability of the global climate system itself, there is the
added factor of external influences, such as volcanoes and solar activity. There is a
growing body of opinion that both these physical variations have a measurable
impact on the climate. Thus we need to be able to include these in
our deliberations. Some current analyses conclude that volcanoes and solar activity
explain quite a considerable amount of the observed variability in the period from
the seventeenth to the early twentieth centuries, but that they cannot be invoked to
explain the rapid warming in recent decades.
[107]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Seventeenth-Century European Economic
Growth
In the late sixteenth century and into the seventeenth, Europe continued the growth
that had lifted it out of the relatively less prosperous medieval period (from the mid
400s to the late 1400s). Among the key factors behind this growth were increased
agricultural productivity and an expansion of trade.
Populations cannot grow unless the rural economy can produce enough additional
food to feed more people. During the sixteenth century, farmers brought more land
into cultivation at the expense of forests and fens (low-lying wetlands). Dutch land
reclamation in the Netherlands in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries provides
the most spectacular example of the expansion of farmland: the Dutch reclaimed
more than 36.000 acres from 1590 to 1615 alone.
Much of the potential for European economic development lay in what at first
glance would seem to have been only sleepy villages. Such villages, however,
generally lay in regions of relatively advanced agricultural production, permitting
not only the survival of peasants but also the accumulation of an agricultural
surplus for investment. They had access to urban merchants, markets, and trade
routes.
Increased agricultural production in turn facilitated rural industry, an intrinsic part
of the expansion of industry. Woolens and textile manufacturers, in particular,
utilized rural cottage (in-home) production, which took advantage of cheap and
plentiful rural labor. In the German states, the ravages of the Thirty Years' War
(1618-1648) further moved textile production into the countryside. Members of
[108]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
poor peasant families spun or wove cloth and linens at home for scant
remuneration in an attempt to supplement meager family income.
More extended trading networks also helped develop Europe's economy in this
period. English and Dutch ships carrying rye from the Baltic states reached Spain
and Portugal. Population growth generated an expansion of small-scale
manufacturing, particularly of handicrafts, textiles, and metal production in
England, Flanders, parts of northern Italy, the southwestern German states, and
parts of Spain. Only iron smelting and mining required marshaling a significant
amount of capital (wealth invested to create more wealth).
The development of banking and other financial services contributed to the
expansion of trade. By the middle of the sixteenth century, financiers and traders
commonly accepted bills of exchange in place of gold or silver for other goods.
Bills of exchange, which had their origins in medieval Italy, were promissory notes
(written promises to pay a specified amount of money by a certain date) that could
be sold to third parties. In this way, they provided credit.At mid-century, an
Antwerp financier only slightly exaggerated when he claimed, “0ne can no more
trade without bills of exchange than sail without water." Merchants no longer had
to carry gold and silver over long, dangerous journeys.An Amsterdam merchant
purchasing soap from a merchant in Marseille could go to an exchanger and pay
the exchanger the equivalent sum in guilders, the Dutch currency.The exchanger
would then send a bill of exchange to a colleague in Marseille, authorizing the
colleague to pay the Marseille merchant in the merchant's own currency after the
actual exchange of goods had taken place.
Bills of exchange contributed to the development of banks, as exchangers began to
provide loans. Not until the eighteenth century, however, did such banks as the
[109]
TPO Reading Passages (www.ZabanExam.com)
Bank of Amsterdam and the Bank of England begin to provide capital for business
investment. Their principal function was to provide funds for the state.
The rapid expansion in international trade also benefitted from an infusion of
capital, stemming largely from gold and silver brought by Spanish vessels from the
Americas. This capital financed the production of goods, storage, trade, and even
credit across Europe and overseas. Moreover an increased credit supply was
generated by investments and loans by bankers and wealthy merchants to states
and by joint-stock partnerships—an English innovation (the first major company
began in 1600). Unlike short-term financial cooperation between investors for a
single commercial undertaking, joint-stock companies provided permanent funding
of capital by drawing on the investments of merchants and other investors who
purchased shares in the company.